Measuring Modernist Novelty
Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze
11.09.18
Peer-Reviewed By: Mark Algee-Hewitt; Elizabeth Dillon
Clusters: Genre, Change
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.027
Dataverse DOI: 10.7910/DVN/VWCAON
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Arend Hintze, Devin Higgins, and Laura McGrath, “Measuring Modernist
Novelty,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. November 9, 2018.

One may as well begin with two overly-cited quotations about novelty.1 The
first: “On or about December, 1910, human character changed.” And, more
predictably: “Make It New!”
That these two statements about change and innovation have been so frequently
cited reveals a contradiction in modernist studies: novelty is commonplace,
both for modernist writers and for literary critics. Novelty has become so
firmly fixed as a central framing narrative for literary modernism that the
two terms—“novelty”, “modernism”—are often treated as synonymous. The
period (roughly, 1890-1945) has been defined by its capacities for rupture and
the rejection of tradition: a “paradigmatic shift, a major revolt;” ” a ruthless
break with any or all preceding historical conditions […] characterized by a
never-ending process of internal ruptures and fragmentations within itself;” “a
powerful vortex of historical conditions that coalesce to produce sharp ruptures
1 The authors would like to thank Thomas Padilla for his early work on this project. The preliminary study of the Bloom Filter’s application to literary texts was conducted by Hintze, Higgins, and
Thomas Padilla, and presented at DH2015 as “Patterns of Novelty in Literary Data.”

1

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

from the past […] shattering change.”2 These revolts, breaks, and ruptures
coalesced into the definitive sense of newness that would come to define the age
for modernists and modernist literary critics alike, producing an exhaustive,
exhausting commitment to newness in all its forms:
The new spirit, the new form, the new reality, the new object, new
facts, new organisms, new life, new values, a new world, new cosmos, new society, new culture or civilization, new era or epoch, new
time and new age, to which the new consciousness and enhanced
susceptibility would respond with a new sensitivity, a new corporeality, a new psychology aroused by new sensations; and these would
give rise, naturally, to a new aesthetics, a new beauty —a new realism
and a new archaism, enforced by a new rhythm—arising from new
means and new methods: a new art, architecture, plastic expression,
poetry, literature, new words and new language, music, drama, new
optic realms, a new vision, a new. . . . The alacrity required to dispel the old order was audacious and impulsive, but it could always
be called New.3
Then as now, the “new” means everything and nothing, as Jed Rasula’s catalog
aptly demonstrates. Novelty is so capacious a concept that it is a challenge to operationalize and measure—the very processes that would provide a deeper understanding of both the concept and its significance in modernism, literary history,
and beyond. In this essay, we propose a method to measure one type of literary
novelty—not distinct to, but emblematic of, high modernism: intratextuality.
Situating modernism’s literary innovations in the context of contemporaneous
linguistic and scientific theory, Michael Levenson coined the term “intratextuality” to describe modernism’s “aesthetic of composites” in his essay ”Novelty,
Modernity, Adjacency. 4 In keeping with Levenson’s scientifically-inflected definition of modernist novelty, we derive our methods from computational biology
and metagenomics, applying a Bloom Filter to the study of literary texts.
“Novelty” is a concept that has fascinated scientists, philosophers, and mathematicians as much as literary critics, as Michael North has shown; it is a fieldspecific term, taking on different meanings and tonal registers in different disciplines.5 While literary critics such as Rasula may treat novelty as “new words and
a new language,” metagenomicists, for instance, understand novelty as a genetic
2 Astradur Eysteinsson, The Concept of Modernism (1990): David Harvey, “Modernity and Modernism,” Modernism, ed. Tim Middleton (2003): 269; Susan Stanford Friedman, “Periodizing Modernism,” Modernism/modernity 13.3 (September, 2006): 433.
3 Jed Rasula, “Make it New.” Modernism/modernity 17.4 (November, 2010): 713-733.
4 “Michael Levenson,”Novelty, Modernity, Adjacency.” New Literary History 42.4 (2011): 663-680.
5 See North, Michael. Novelty: A History of the New (2015).

2

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

mutation. A number of methods have been developed in bioinformatics in order to detect, measure, and analyze these instances of genetic novelty—methods
that, when applied to literary texts, grant us a means of tracking novelty at its
most microscopic level: the individual character. To that end, the aims of this essay are threefold: first, to demonstrate the potential of metagenomic methods for
the analysis of intratextual novelty; second, to validate the measurement through
close reading; third, to propose provisional hypotheses about the basic shapes of
intratextual novelty that emerge from our preliminary results. Our hope is that
this early analysis—a sort of methodological provocation—might open new possibilities for question, conversation, and collaboration.
**

Methods: Intratextual Novelty and The Bloom Filter
Modernist novelty has been described as encompassing, but irreducible to
“formal experiment, dislocation of conventional syntax, radical breaches of
decorum, disturbance of chronology and spatial order, polysemy, obscurity,
mythopoeic allusion, primitivism, irrationalism, structuring by symbol and
motif rather than by narrative or argumentative logic”—to say nothing of the
novelties of mass culture: advertisements, paperbacks, and pulps. A number
of formal literary innovations were often revisions of past forms, such as Eliot’s
reliance on myth, rather than wholly new artistic experiments. A number of
contradictions, then, rest at the heart of modernist novelty: both a rupture of
epistemic newness and dime store tchotchkes, at once avant-garde and culture
industry, equally innovation and renovation.
Beyond the definitional, novelty raises the problems of context and scale —that is,
“new” and “not new” are constantly moving targets. “Novelty” is a comparative,
contextual evaluation, judged only in relationship to the typical, the commonplace, the conventional, or the familiar. With each appearance of the new, both
convention and the potential for innovation shift,6 a problem that T.S. Eliot con6 Novelty is not only always relative to what has come before it, but it also lays the groundwork
for whatever novelty may surpass it, rearranging what scientists have called “the adjacent possible.”
Recent research attempting to test the intuition that one novelty begets another, has shown that the
concept of novelty (describing a formation that is new only from a particular perspective, e.g. in
the reader’s experience moving page by page through a novel) is strongly linked to the concept of
innovation (describing a formation that is new to all perspectives, e.g. to all readers in relation to
their larger reading lives). Both forms of newness, local and global, appear to align with the same
mathematical models whereby if “a novelty of any kind occurs, it does not occur alone. It comes
with an entourage of surrounding possibilities, a cloud of other potentially new ideas or experiences

3

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

sidered at length in his seminal essay, “Tradition and the Individual Talent”: ”The
existing monuments form an ideal order among themselves, which is modified
by the introduction of the new (the really new) work of art among them… for order to persist after the supervention of novelty, the whole existing order must be,
if ever so slightly, altered; and so the relations, proportions, values of each work
of art toward the whole are readjusted.”7 For Eliot, novelty’s comparative nature
is also a problem of scale, in which the context of the “whole existing order” is
both ever-shifting and ever-expanding. Eliot’s “new (the really new)” would be
methodologically impossible to measure.
In his essay, “Novelty, Modernity, Adjacency,” Michael Levenson advances a
heuristic for understanding novelty-in-context: intratextuality. Instead of the
revolutionary novel, Levenson proposes intratextuality as model of the relationally novel, developed in response to both Bertram Russell’s logical atomism and
Saussurean linguistics. Levenson writes, “Intratextuality designates all those relations threaded within the boundaries of the artifact itself, all the mirroring and
summoning of one piece of text by another… the tonal play that aligns distant
elements without building narrative connections…The persistent impulse to say
it again as said before, to repeat and resume, to gather up the foregoing words of
the text, to have them melt into one another… assemble[d] into an echo chamber of mutual relations.” 8 The result is an “aesthetic of composites, multivoiced,
polyphonic compounds,” representative of the usual high modernist suspects —
“The Waste Land,” Ulysses, montage, Cubism. Modernism’s inheritance, Levenson argues, is the “inveterate relation of novelty and context,” made particularly
apparent by moments of intratextuality. Intratextual novelty is not an absolute
novelty, in which individual work readjusts an Eliotic “whole existing order,” but
rather, novelty contained within a text—the means by which an individual text
might evince novelty within itself. Delimiting novelty’s context to the boundaries
of a text provides a much more stable basis for sorting the “new” from the “not
new,” and an eminently more measurable scale. It is here that we begin, adopting
Levenson’s concept of intratextuality as a means of operationalizing novelty as a
high modernist form.
To identify moments of novelty within the context of the familiar, we turn to
bioinformatics, a field that poses similar questions about novelty vs. familiarity
- not about literature, but about genetics, studying the progression of genetic sethat are thematically adjacent to it and hence can be triggered by it.” See F. Tria, V. Loreto, V. D. P.
Servedio, and S. H. Strogatz. “The Dynamics of Correlated Novelties.” Nature (July 2014).
7 T.S. Eliot and Frank Kermode, Selected Prose of T.S. Eliot. (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux,
1988), 38.
8 Michael Levenson, “Novelty, Modernity, Adjacency.” New Literary History 42.4 (2011): 668-70.

4

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

quences for previously unseen materials.9 Novelty, in this context, means that
a particular DNA sequence either deviates subtly from an earlier found sample or has never been seen before. In order to identify novelty within samples,
metagenomicists employ a probabilistic, memory-efficient data structure called
the Bloom Filter, which trades an acceptable amount of error for enough data capacity to work at scale.10 Simply put, the Bloom Filter determines whether or not
an element is a part of a set, allowing scientists to quickly identify moments of
genetic variance for further study.11 When applied to literature, the Bloom Filter
makes it possible to computationally identify moments of heightened or diminished newness within a text (“has this string of text been seen before?”), as well as
the degree of internal variation or novelty that occurs across the text as a whole
(“how many times?”). Instead of an externally defined comparison (“the whole
existing order”), the Bloom Filter analyzes character-sequence novelty within a
text itself, providing us a measurement of intratextual novelty.
The Filter scans the entirety of a text, tracking the repetition of language at incredibly small, precise intervals called k-mers; in our case, a fixed 12-character
window called a 12-mer. The Bloom Filter evaluates the text one k-mer at a time,
starting at the beginning then advancing one character, such that 12-mer 1 of the
English alphabet would be ABCDEFGHIJKL, 12-mer 2 would be BCDEFGHIJKLM, and the third 12-mer would be CDEFGHIJKLMN, and so on.12 The Filter develops a growing database of k-mers, and each new k-mer is assessed for
its presence (novelty score of 0, i.e., already in the database, therefore: not new)
or absence (novelty score of 1, i.e., not in the database, therefore: new) in the
9 Indeed, as Alberto Piazza reflects in his Afterward to Franco Moretti’s Graphs, Maps, and Trees,
literary theorists and biologists share a great many metaphors: Scientists and philosophers alike rely
on the alphabetic sequence and, even, the metaphor of poetic inspiration to describe complex, evolutionary problems; DNA is translated and transcribed, not to mention written, copied, and, increasingly, edited. See Franco Moretti, Graphs, Maps, and Trees. (New York: Verso, 2007).
10 For more on the ways that Bloom Filter has been used to measure genetic novelty, see Jason
Pell, Arend Hintze, Rosangela Canino-Koning, Adina Howe, James M. Tiedje, and C. Titus Brown,
“Scaling Metagenome Sequence Assembly with Probabilistic de Bruijn Graphs.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 109, no. 33 (2012): 13272-13277.
11 The Bloom Filter and the models that we employ in this essay are similar to the sorts of sequence
analysis that has recently found its way into computational studies of culture. See Alexander T.J.
Barron, Jenny Huang, Rebecca L. Spang, and Simon DeDeo, “Individuals, Institutions, and Innovation in the Debates of the French Revolution.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America (2018); Shaobin Xu, David A. Smith, Abigail Mullen, and Ryan Cordell,
“Detecting and Evaluating Local Text Reuse in Social Networks.” Proceedings of the Joint Workshop
on Social Dynamics and Personal Attributes, Association for Computational Linguistics (2014): 50-57;
and Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu, “The Dark Code: Race, Computation and the
History of White-Black Literary Relations, 1880-2000.” CA, forthcoming.
12 Punctuation and spaces are included in each k-mer, which are encoded according to their ASCII
value using a modulo-32 operation to reduce the number of bits required to encode each character
from 8 to 5.

5

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

database. The Bloom Filter is a data structure that achieves a workable efficiency
at the cost of the occasional “hash collision,” when the filter stores two pieces
of information in the same spot, indistinguishably. So, the Bloom Filter will return false positives (identifying an unknown sequence as known), but never false
negatives (identifying a known sequence as unknown). That is to say, while the
Bloom Filter might erroneously mislabel a segment of text as “not novel,” it never
erroneously labels a text as “novel.” Our novelty scores, therefore, are quite trustworthy, if erring on the conservative side. A text will remain 100% novel until the
point at which a k-mer is repeated at any point in the text.13
Consider this scan of Gertrude Stein’s “A rose is a rose is a rose.” (Table 1.) For
ease of illustration, spaces are represented as underscores. While segments of
Stein’s sentence repeat - “rose”- only a perfect match of a k-mer is scored a 0.
A_rose_is_a_
_rose_is_a_r
rose_is_a_ro
ose_is_a_ros
se_is_a_rose
e_is_a_rose_
_is_a_rose_
is_a_rose_i
s_a_rose_is
_a_rose_is_
a_rose_is
_rose_is_a_r
rose_is_a_ro
ose_is_a_ros
se_is_a_rose
e_is_a_rose.

Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Novel
Not novel
Not novel
Not novel
Not novel
Not novel
Novel

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1

Table 1. Novelty Scores
This example is illustrative of the importance of character sequence and order to
the Bloom Filter. Though Stein repeats only three words, the word-sequence and
punctuation are vital to the Filter’s understanding of the text’s relative novelty. If
more variation were to enter this sequence, the filter would register novelty at the
point in which the variable character was introduced.
As this example demonstrates, approximately 59% of Stein’s sentence is novel, at
the level of character sequence. But imagine this scan occurring at the scale of the
chapter, or the text. While variations of “a rose is” may not appear often, certainly
character names (“Alice_B_To”), dialogue tags (“_she_said.”), or Stein’s characteristic repetition would cause her writing to register as less novel as the text
progresses. To a Stein scholar, this finding may seem counter-intuitive; Stein’s
repetition is precisely what makes her work so innovative. However, because
the Bloom Filter’s assessment of character-sequence novelty ultimately registers
13 All code is available for use in our GitHub Repository: https://github.com/devinhiggins/NoveltyFilter

6

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

patterns of relative newness and not-newness over the course of a text, atypical
repetition like Stein’s can be reclaimed as innovation in its own right, bringing a
level of nuance and sophistication to our understanding of novelty beyond a simple proportion of unique words. By registering novelty at the level of the k-mer
and the character, the Bloom Filter attends more closely to the stylistic components of text that are often elided, dismissed pragmatically as noise, reading (as
in DNA) the most elemental components of language as raw data, from which we
might make claims at the level of sentence, the paragraph, the chapter, the text.
As a heuristic, we believe that the Bloom Filter’s analysis of the smallest, most
basic units of measurement in language helps us to peer in at something decidedly less basic, and, potentially impossible to ever fully capture in an algorithmic
method: the sense of newness.

Results: Visualizing Intratextual Novelty
What does the Bloom Filter reveal at the scale of the book? What formal patterns emerge in innovation and repetition? And how do those patterns help us
understand intratextual novelty? In order to process even larger pieces of data,
the sequences of 0s and 1s is binned into intervals of 10,000 k-mers, computing
the fraction of 1s in each interval as its novelty score. These scores can then be
graphed, providing us with a general shape of how intratextual novelty unfolds
in narrative time, from cover to cover. Each text begins with 100% novelty - none
of it has been seen before - and novelty gradually decays as character sequences
are repeated.14 The Bloom Filter reveals the ways in which character-sequence
novelty unfolds throughout a text, how quickly and often k-mers are reused. The
Bloom Filter thus registers moments of relative novelty, in which moments of
newness are measured against the aggregated text that came before - or, novelty
in context.

14 While it might be theoretically possible for novelty to steadily increase over a text, it is highly
implausible; every graph produced by the Bloom Filter has a negative slope.

7

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

Figure 1. This graph shows the course of novelty in George Eliot’s Middlemarch.
Along the x-axis are intervals of binned k-mers; the y-axis shows the degree of
novelty. We see a fairly steady rate of decay, without much internal variation.
In Middlemarch, for instance, novelty appears to decay at a steady, gradual rate
from the novel’s early intervals (see fig. 1). The peaks registering “novel” and
valleys registering “not-novel” do not vary substantially from the best fit line
(r²=0.8903), and occur at what appear to be fairly well-paced intervals. This suggests that the language of Middlemarch is fairly consistent, and exhibits very little internal variation. Middlemarch demonstrates usefully the limitations of the
Bloom Filter. It would be a mistake to read this graph as a visual description of
the shape of the novel’s plot, sentiments, or narrative structure. Though novelty
seems to increase in the novel’s last, small interval, we cannot rightly say - either
by interpreting this graph or by reading Middlemarch - that the novel has a surprise ending. We can say, however, that the language in Middlemarch appears to
vary very little, and novelty appears to decay at a steady rate.
By contrast, and in keeping with our filter’s name, we turn to James Joyce’s Ulysses.
How would the filter register Ulysses’s novelty, if at all? Bloomian resonances
aside, Ulysses is a useful counterpoint to Middlemarch: it’s a common touchstone
in discussions of novelty and the signal text in literary modernism. Levenson
uses Ulysses’ “telegraphic repetition” to make his case for modernist intratextuality. How would the novelty filter respond to a text that we presume, from
the outset and without question, to be incredibly novel in distinctly modernist
terms? Joyce’s language is intentionally playful and experimental, providing ample opportunity to test the Bloom Filter’s precision and flexibility for measuring
intratextual novelty: Ulysses relies on a new language system for (almost) each
episode, from the advert-speak of “Aeolus” to the catechism of “Ithaca.” How
does the Bloom Filter respond to these changes?
8

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

Figure 2. This figure shows the course of novelty in James Joyce’s Ulysses. We
see a high level of variation in the novel’s language, as the novelty scores do not
conform to the best fit line.
Unlike Middlemarch, the dispersal of character-sequence novelty throughout
Ulysses appears uneven (see fig. 2). While the novelty of Middlemarch decays
at a steady rate, Ulysses appears to exhibit a good deal of variation, suggesting
both frequent innovation and repetition. While the graph of Ulysses is striking
in its inconsistency, we need to return to the text in order to study these high
and low points in detail. We wrote a Python script that marks up texts with
intervals and running novelty scores to ease the process of cross-referencing and
determining what textual features may have produced a given score (available
for public access in our GitHub Repository).15 An examination of Ulysses helps
us to clarify the nature of the novelty laid out by the Bloom Filter: the percentage
of the text that registers as “novel” is far less significant to our purposes than
the ways that the text varies - how it repeats, revises, and recirculates textual
material.
After the early chapters (declining as Stephen Dedalus and Buck Mulligan speak,
then jumping up again as the narrative shifts to Eccles Street), the major spike
in novelty occurs around interval 90, approximately 55% of the way through the
text. Even given Joyce’s experimentation, this increase in novelty is dramatic—
particularly at the novel’s midpoint. Interval 90 corresponds to episode 14, “Oxen
of the Sun.” An episode known for its difficulty, “Oxen of the Sun” rehearses
the history of the English language as Bloom waits at the Holles Street maternity
hospital during Mrs. Purefoy’s labor and delivery. Yet, at some point in episode
14, the English language catches up to Joyce, and novelty begins to decline once
more.
15 See script and marked up texts at https://github.com/devinhiggins/Novelty-Filter/blob/master/
texts/modernism/Joyce_Ulysses_intervals.txt

9

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

Around interval 45, Ulysses’ character-sequence novelty dips to a surprisingly
low level. This decline corresponds to the beginning of episode 10, “Wandering
Rocks,” which presents a series of short vignettes about Dublin residents loosely
connected to the Bloom and Dedalus families. The language is highly repetitive,
both in word choice and sentence structure, with the character’s full name in the
subject position - “Father John Conmee” or “Blazes Boylan,” without abbreviation - followed by a simple past tense verb (Father John Conmee walked, Father
John Conmee thought, Father John Conmee smiled). The repetition in names
and sentence structure would seem to account for this apparent drop in novelty. While “Wandering Rocks” demonstrates very little innovation in the form
of (say) portmanteau or onomatopoeia, its character-sequence repetition in simple sentences represents a marked difference within Ulysses, particularly on the
heels of the absurd rhetorical battle of episode 9, “Scylla and Charybdis.” These
low-points are significant, and should not be read as “not novel,” but, as in our
example of Gertrude Stein, moments of unusual character-sequence repetition
that serve as a form of experimentation itself.
Just as peaks in novelty scores indicate moments of high innovation, we suggest
reading these valleys of moments of experimental repetition, a form of textual
play and reinvention. The Bloom Filter most effectively highlights the interplay
of sameness and difference that is a hallmark of intratextuality. In the context of
fluctuating difference, sameness or repetition rightly appears as a formal choice.
Because the Bloom Filter produces a measurement of relative novelty, moments
of intense repetition (such as “Wandering Rocks”) only make the bursts of new
language (such as “Oxen of the Sun”) all the more startling, and the spikes in
our readouts steeper. The Bloom Filter thus helps us to positively value unusual
repetition as a form of novelty in itself.
It is tempting to read the novel’s plot into the graph - to equate each peak with
a new episode in Leopold Bloom’s walk around Dublin. This simply is not the
case; there is no direct correlation between novelty score and plot. While there
are moments where the novelty scores correspond to important episodes in the
novel, this is due to the language that Joyce employs in a particular episode; this
clear correspondence would likely not appear in texts that are more singularly
voiced. (Later examples will further illuminate this principle). Even still, the
case of Ulysses helps us to clarify the type of novelty that the Bloom Filter can
register at the scale of the single text. It would seem that it is especially wellsuited to evaluating intratextual novelty in highly fragmentary, multivocal texts,
like Ulysses - evaluating the ways that a text deploys novelty internally through
reinvention, regeneration, or recycling textual material.

10

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

Results: Comparing Intratextual Novelty
Our first-pass, visual comparison between Middlemarch and Ulysses appears to
indicate that Middlemarchian novelty decays relatively consistently throughout
and Ulysses displays wild intratextual variation. But how consistent or wild are
each of these texts when compared to others? To understand the relative intratextual novelty of both texts, we compared intratextual novelty scores on a midsized corpus. We rely on two primary metrics (depicted in the linear regressions
above) to compare the intratextual novelty of multiple texts: r² and slope. Taken
together, these two measures are surprisingly descriptive.
Degree of Formal Variation: We use r² to describe the degree of formal variation. The r² value, typically a measurement of error, measures the relationship
between the best-fit line and the running novelty scores. A high r² value (close
to 1) indicates very little internal variation since the the best-fit line adequately
describes the general shape of the novelty’s decay (as in Middlemarch). A low r²
value indicates that there is a high degree of internal variation, for the best fit line
does not accurately describe the running novelty scores (as in Ulysses). The r²
can handily describe the degree of variation in the language, accounting for both
moments of striking newness and moments of unusual repetition.
Rate of Novelty Decay: By contrast, the slope tells us about the rate or pace of novelty decay, or how quickly a text becomes ingrained in its own linguistic milieu.
A steep slope suggests that novelty depletes itself quickly and steadily; the novel’s
language is likely conventional (unto itself) and consistent throughout—again,
Middlemarch. A shallow slope, by contrast, indicates that a text decays slowly;
said another way, a shallow slope indicates that variation occurs throughout the
entirety of the text. The slope thus tells us something about the structure of intratextual novelty in the most general terms, without accounting for the shape of its
unfolding, as the r² value does.
By graphing the r² (degree of variation) and slope (rate of decay) together, we can
see how much and how often variation occurs over the course of a text, allowing
us to better clarify the contours of intratextual novelty. These two parameters
provide a basis for comparing texts to one another (i.e., the intratextual novelty
of Text A against the intratextual novelty of Text B) and have the potential to
enable macro-level questions. By graphing the degree of variation against the
rate of decay, we hypothesized, we could establish a set of parameters for typical
intratextual novelty—that is, the way that most texts exhibit novelty internally—
while accounting for variation in textual patterns.
We ran the Bloom Filter against a corpus of texts, graphing each according to
11

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

its degree of variation (x-axis) and rate of decay (y-axis). For this exploratory
analysis, our corpus remained relatively small, only 410 Anglophone texts, spanning 1700-2016. We used English-language texts provided by the txtLAB 450
corpus.16 Additionally, we developed a working list of 20th century titles by
compiling publicly available doctoral field exam lists from leading universities,
arriving at a relatively stable list of widely-held canonical titles, evenly dispersed
over time. (See Appendix for a full list.)

Figure 3. This graph shows the novelty of 410 Anglophone novels. r² is measured along the x-axis, and slope is measured along the y-axis. Confidence intervals have been inserted, with p<0.05. Ulysses is marked with a green arrow, and
Middlemarch is marked with a red arrow.
On the x-axis is the degree of variation (r²), and on the y-axis, the rate of decay
(slope). Texts that are closer to 1.0 on the x-axis exhibit a smaller degree of internal variation. The closer a text is to 0.00 on the y-axis, the slower the rate of decay.
Theoretically, the text with the highest levels of intratextual novelty would be one
with a completely flat slope and an r² value of 1.0 - high degrees of variation, consistent throughout the text. A more realistic version of high intratextual novelty,
however, seems to couple very flat, slightly negative, slopes with correspondingly
high degrees of internal variation. In figure 3, dotted lines represent confidence
intervals of p < 0.05; texts that fall outside of those dotted lines exhibit statistically
significant levels of intratextual novelty. The centermost segment of the graph,
where most texts fall, indicates a fairly standard degree of intratextual novelty:
16 Our thanks to Andrew Piper and the McGill University .txtlab for both sharing their post-1923
corpus, and making the Novel 450 corpus available for further research.

12

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

a moderate degree of internal variation and a moderate rate of decay. Middlemarch (marked with the red arrow) is positioned within this central cluster, and
is typical of novels in our corpus.
Many of the texts that exhibit an unusual degree of intratextual novelty have long
been held up as exemplars of modernist novelty, giving us confidence in the validity of our measure. Yet many of these results surprise us. Ulysses, marked
by a green arrow, is not quite as overwhelmingly novel as we presumed; while
exhibiting a slower rate of decay, its degree of internal variation is actually not
statistically significant to the degree we’re measuring here. This is not to say that
Ulysses is not a significantly novel text according to the Bloom Filter, but that
different types of intratextual novelty emerged through our analysis.

1. Intratextual Fragmentation: High, Sustained Variation
Novels that have both a significantly slow rate of decay and a significantly high
degree of internal variation are our most novel texts, and are located in the top
left corner of our graph; tellingly, only one novel falls in this region: The Sound
and the Fury. No other text in our corpus exhibits anything close to this degree of
intratextual novelty, in terms of both variation and continuity. (In a larger corpus,
we believe that it is entirely plausible that other texts would exhibit novelty of this
degree.)

Figure 4. This graph shows the course of novelty over William Faulkner’s The
Sound and the Fury. Within our corpus, The Sound and the Fury is by all measures novel, with a significantly shallow slope and a significantly low r². The bars
on this graph show how often novelty falls outside standard margins of error.
13

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

No other text in our corpus contains an interval score that exceeds that of the
first interval; novelty consistently decays from the beginning of most texts. Here,
however, the novel begins with a novelty score of .8998 in interval 1, then drops
to a low-point of .748 at interval 9, before jumping up to .932 at interval 13. An
examination of the binned text confirmed our suspicions: The Sound and the
Fury famously opens with narrative written from the perspective of Benjy Compson, which consists of a great deal of word-level repetition, a limited vocabulary,
and simple syntax. The novelty score begins shifting upward at interval 10, corresponding with the shift to Quentin Compson’s point of view; novelty increases
to a 1.0, entirely new in comparison to Benjy’s narration, reflecting not only the
point of view shift but the difference in language and syntactic complexity. While
this result is consistent with a reading of the novel, and is a (more extreme) version of what we expected to see reflected in a graph of The Sound and the Fury,
it is less the individual high- and low-points that are significant than the degree
of difference between the two. To say that Benjy’s point of view is somehow notnovel because the scores are so low is simply false; indeed, Benjy’s narration is
perhaps the most unusual aspect of The Sound and the Fury. Similarly, to say
that Quentin’s point of view is somehow more novel simply because of its high
score is also disingenuous. The difference between these two sections, and the
rather jarring shift, is what distinguishes The Sound and the Fury from other novels in our corpus.
The Sound and the Fury is also continuously novel, spiking again at interval 47;
that is to say, the novel repeatedly reinvents itself, introducing new types of textual variation relatively late in the text. While the middle sections of the novel,
narrated by Quentin and Jason Compson, do not vary substantially (all scores
falling within the standard error range), the end of the novel peaks toward the
beginning of “April Eighth, 1928.” This may be due to the narrative emphasis on
Dilsey and the prevalence of Faulkner’s variation on black English; it may also be
due to the shift from first person to third. Because the language shifts with each
narrative perspective, and because the novel changes perspective continuously,
The Sound and the Fury exhibits an especially flat slope. More than any other
text we examined, The Sound and the Fury exhibits high and consistent textual
variation, whereas other novels with multiple narrators (as in our next case, The
Color Purple) taper off once the diverging voices have been introduced.
That The Sound and the Fury should emerge as our most novel text confirmed
our confidence in our measure’s ability to capture the types of intratextual novelty most closely associated with modernism - novelty akin to fragmentation,
montage, or a composite form. The Sound and the Fury is a fascinating example;
no other text in our corpus match its internal variation or its consistent renova14

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

tion. But it is also important to note that The Sound and the Fury is not the only
Faulkner text in our corpus. We also included As I Lay Dying, for comparison’s
sake, and found that it falls within the typical range. Our intratextual novelty
scores seem to be not necessarily a matter of oeuvre or aesthetic, but (appropriately) vary by text. For now, The Sound and the Fury is in a class of its own, a text
that varies wildly in its Bloomian novelty, but when all is said and done, the final
page turned, has also left a record of sustained textual invention.

2. Dialogic Novelty: High Variation, Average Decay
Novels in Category 2 exhibit many of the same features as The Sound and the Fury
by virtue of their equally high degree of internal variation: the language varies
such that the best fit line does not accurately describe the majority of the text.
While more texts exhibit this type of novelty than Category 1 novelty, it is still
rather rare in our corpus. The texts that fall into this category, including The Color
Purple and A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, would indicate that our results
fall less neatly into categories than a continuum. We turn to The Color Purple for
illustration. While the significance of A Portrait of the Artist is unsurprising,
given our research team’s investment in literary modernism and our measure’s
apparent sensitivity to intratextual fragmentation, The Color Purple is associated
neither with the modernist period, nor is it held up as an example of a modernist
continuation beyond midcentury into the latter 20th. A closer investigation of
Walker’s novel is particularly illustrative of the Bloom Filter’s limitations.
The Color Purple has a typical rate of decay. But the degree of internal variation is
significantly high. The Color Purple is an epistolary novel, and like The Sound and
the Fury, has more than one first-person narrator—Celie composes the majority
of letters, first to God and then to her sister Nettie, who in return writes a number
of letters to Celie. There is a fairly steep rate of decay in the first quarter of the
novel, consistent with Celie’s vocabulary and short letters. The novelty increases,
however, once Celie discovers and begins reading Nettie’s letters, hidden over
a number of years (the biggest spike in novelty corresponds with Celie’s initial
discovery). Nettie’s letters employ a more sophisticated vocabulary and sentence
structure, in keeping with her education. Furthermore, Nettie’s vocabulary is
contextually different than Celie’s. Nettie is a missionary in northern Africa, and
her vocabulary reflects her immediate cultural context; Nettie’s letters introduce
nouns that would never occur in Celie’s letters. Even still, while the running
novelty score peaks slightly each time the narration shifts between the sisters, it
15

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

recalibrates to their respective vocabularies and contexts, decaying at a standard
rate.

Figure 5. This graph shows the novelty of Alice Walker’s The Color Purple, which
exhibits a significantly low r² but a typical slope.
The instances of unusual repetition in The Color Purple are especially instructive—the name “dialogic novelty” is meant to gesture toward these low-points as
much as the novel’s structural dialogue between Celie and Nettie. Unlike Nettie’s
letters, Celie’s, as the main narrative, consist of a great deal of dialogue. Celie
writes without punctuation and with a great deal of repetition to indicate who is
speaking and to whom. This passage, for example, comes from the interval with
the lowest novelty score:
Too late to cry, Miss Eleanor Jane, say Sofia. […]
You just don’t like him cause he look like daddy, say Miss Eleanor
Jane.
You don’t like him cause he look like daddy, say Sofia. I don’t feel
nothing about him at all. I don’t love him, I don’t hate him. I just
wish he couldn’t run loose all the time messing up folks stuff.
All the time! All the time! say Miss Eleanor Jane. Sofia, he just a
baby. Not even a year old. He only been here five or six times.
I feel like he been here forever, say Sofia.
This back and forth between Sofia and Eleanor Jane is fairly typical of the dialogue
that Celie writes. With a sort of call-and-response structure, Sofia repeats much
of what Eleanor Jane tells her, with slight differences, often implied tonally (“You
just don’t like him cause he look like daddy,” and “You don’t like him cause he
16

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

look like Daddy”). Without punctuation, Celie also insists on repetitive dialogue
tags—“say Sofia” and “say Miss Eleanor Jane” repeat a number of times in this
passage, consistent with all of the dialogue in the novel. Here, the measurement
is somewhat deceptive. Dialogue is not the same thing as experimental repetition,
in a Steinian sense, but the Bloom Filter, agnostic to the fictional content it scans,
encodes these segments of texts similarly. This is not to say that The Color Purple
is a false positive, but it does reveal the limitations of the measurement. The work
of close reading remains necessary in order to understand the dynamics being
measured, scored, and graphed.

3. Maximalist Novelty: Average Variation, Slow Decay

Category 3 texts demonstrate a statistically significant level of novelty across one
variable: slope. Category 3 texts sustain a novelty continuously over their length,
but do not exhibit as much internal variation as the unusual exemplar in Category 1; interval novelty scores rarely exceed or fall below a standard margin of
error, resulting in an non-significant r² score. The slopes, however, are statistically flatter than most texts in our corpus. Novels in this category include Ulysses,
Infinite Jest, and Gravity’s Rainbow. We’ll take Infinite Jest as our example.
Infinite Jest (see Fig. 6) exhibits very little internal variation; its r² value falls
within the typical range. Initially, the novel’s typical r² score surprised us. We
were expecting Infinite Jest to exhibit a higher degree of internal variation. In contrast to The Sound and the Fury and Ulysses (which exhibits a low, though still statistically insignificant r²) Infinite Jest is more univocal on a narrative scale; while
The Sound and the Fury and The Color Purple are focalized in the first-person
and through a number of characters, Infinite Jest retains a consistently detached
third-person narration. Infinite Jest owes its flat slope and significant score to one
distinctive portion of the novel: the end. Those familiar with the novel can likely
hazard a guess why: the novel concludes with a dense and meticulously detailed
appendix, beginning around interval 284. The “Notes and Errata” novelty scores
are, true to their name, much more erratic.
17

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

Figure 6. This graph shows novelty over the course of David Foster Wallace’s
Infinite Jest. While the r² is typical, the slope is significantly shallower than most
texts in our corpus.

The endnotes have dramatically influenced the shape of the novel, pulling the
slope upward with their strange variations in form. Other texts that fall into this
category also reflect this pattern, with the later portions of the text shifting in
novelty and rendering the slope more shallow. Thomas Pynchon’s Gravity’s Rainbow also sits comfortably in this category. Gravity’s Rainbow (see Fig. 7) begins
with a rather steep decline. Around interval 125, however, the novelty levels off; a
best-fit line drawn from interval 125 to the end of the novel would look relatively
flat, easily characterizing the majority of the novel. While perhaps Pynchon and
Wallace do not exhibit a great deal of innovation on the micro-level - or, at least,
not much more than is typical - what novelty they do exhibit comes later in the
text. Infinite Jest’s appendix is a limit case; we hypothesize that additional texts in
this category would likely resemble something closer to Gravity’s Rainbow than
Infinite Jest.
18

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

Figure 7. This graph shows novelty over the course of Thomas Pynchon’s Gravity’s
Rainbow. While the r² is typical, the slope is significantly shallower than the most
texts in our corpus.
Our examples in this category raise the question: is this postmodern novelty?
Does it speak to characteristics of the postmodern novel, typified by Wallace
and Pynchon? While the presence of Ulysses seems to confound a neat periodspecific reading, it perhaps suggests a continuity of literary experimentation in
the twentieth century. As exemplars of their respective periods, the similarity of
these texts may gesture towards a more singular modernity than a postmodern
rupture. Rather than a question of periodization, we might also approach these
texts with questions of form. These three texts are all quite long; perhaps this type
of novelty has more to do with length than with any other stylistic category.17 Perhaps we might say, instead, that the novels in this category, Ulysses included, represent a sort of maximalist tendency that reached its apex in postmodernism.18
17 One would be forgiven for wondering at this point whether the Bloom Filter is simply biased
toward longer texts: A line drawn from the novelty reading at point A (the beginning of the text) to
point B (the ending) has a shallower slope the farther apart they are. Yet our data reveals that the
longer texts we examine here really are generating as much new textual novelty over their length than
their shorter yet otherwise identical counterparts. A bias in favor of “more novel” longer texts would
be operative only if the novelty decay plateaued at some point, in which case extending the plateau
a few hundred more pages would certainly seem to “artificially” elevate the calculated slope. Our
analysis shows, however, that attempts to fit non-linear patterns of decay to the data do not return
increased accuracy, and we do not see evidence of this plateauing effect. In fact, the high r² values
our maximalist texts tend to receive, indicate that their shallowly sloping novelty does not subside in
ways a non-linear measure would capture.
18 Stefano Ercolino has remarked on the relationship between length and maximalism, arguing
that, “Length is not simply a neutral material aspect as regards the maximalist novel, but something
more… It is a possibility that turns out to be related both to the strongly innovative and experimental
nature of maximalist novels and to their ambition to realize synthetic-totalizing representations of
the world.” See Ercolino, “The Maximalist Novel.” Comparative Literature 64.3 (2012): 241-256.

19

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

So, just as the Bloom Filter is particularly well-suited to uncovering patterns in
fragmentary texts, it may also be responsive to the long novels that characterize
postmodernism. If not “postmodern” and if not simply “long,” then perhaps we
can see in this type a definition of Maximalist Novelty.

4. Not Novelty: Very Little Variation, Fast Decay

Curiouser and curiouser. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (see Fig. 8) provides
us with another fascinating example. Like The Sound and the Fury, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland is the only text of its type, though others (including Carroll’s
Through the Looking Glass) do tend toward this type of novelty. While The Sound
and the Fury has a uniquely low r² and shallow slope, Alice’s Adventures is nearly
its inverse: it has the steepest slope of any text in our corpus, though the r² is
quite high; at times, there is very little variation between the best fit line and the
novelty interval scores. This suggests that there is very little linguistic variation
at the structural or vocabulary level.

Alice in Wonderland is not significant because of its high degree of internal variation or its slow decay; it is unique in terms of how little variation it exhibits.
This may be related to any number of factors: its genre, its target audience (it is
the only children’s book in our corpus), its precocious narrational style. While
these hypotheses are provocative, and may bear out with more testing, none of
them seem to quite explain why Alice scores so distinctly according to the Bloom
Filter. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland offers an important corrective: all texts
exhibit some novelty, according to our measure. To argue that the texts that fall
within the typical novelty range are not novel is incorrect; as measure of intratextual novelty, the Bloom Filter gives each text an unfolding series of scores for
how novel it is according to its own parameters. Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland registers as significant for how little novelty it exhibits in comparison to our
range of “normal” texts.
20

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

Figure 8. This figure shows the novelty of Lewis Carrol’s Alice’s Adventures in
Wonderland. This text is significant for its relative lack of novelty: the slope is
quite steep, and the r²is quite high.
While only those texts that fall outside of the dotted lines are significantly novel,
it is worth considering this typology as poles toward which novels tend on a continuum: novels with a lower r² tend to vary more syntactically; novels with a
steeper slope tend to be more conventional. Though tendencies in novelty may
not be statistically significant, they are nevertheless descriptive as we seek to understand the shapes that intratextual novelty takes, and provide a useful basis for
comparing novelty across texts. By no means is this analysis exhaustive; rather,
it offers an explanatory heuristic by which we might consider some basic shapes,
patterns, and behaviors of intratextual novelty. Without question, there are more
questions to be asked regarding languages, genres, and any number of other analytical categories.

Conclusion
This proof-of-concept has demonstrated the potential of the Bloom Filter to measure intratextual novelty and suggested ways that the results of this measurement
might be brought to bear on larger questions of literary history, helping us to
better understand the paradoxical concept of novelty and the literature that lays
claims to it. Yet our results raise far more questions than they answer, first among
them: does novelty really exist at the level of the alphabetic character? William
James insisted that not even meaning could be drawn from the character level:
21

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

“It is not as if men had first invented letters and made syllables out of them, then
made words of the syllables and sentences of the words; - they actually followed
the reverse order.”19 Yet words are also not made out of thin air - they do take
form in specific and concrete languages obeying physical rules of morphology
and phonology that do leave their traces in the accidents of spelling. Still, can
we argue that novelty can be measured at the level of the k-mer, an admittedly
constructed unit of measurement? Certainly, the k-mer is not the “it” that Ezra
Pound had in mind when he insisted upon making it new, not Eliot’s “really new”
that should disrupt and rearrange the nature of tradition. And, certainly, novelty
cannot be disentangled from its cultural context. This measurement is an imperfect one, without question. Imperfect though the measurement might be, we
believe that the Bloom Filter does provide a suitable proxy for the measurement
of intratextual novelty, at both the micro and macro scales.
Beyond demonstrating the effectiveness of Bloom Filter, our preliminary analysis raises a number questions, inviting further application of the measurement
that can intervene in the literary history and periodicity of the 20th century. Consider two of our significantly novel texts: Infinite Jest and Gravity’s Rainbow; intratextual novelty may, in fact, be more characteristic of postwar novels, prompting any number of questions regarding postmodernism’s extension, negation, or
response to earlier modernist experimentation. While, on the one hand, these
results may affirm a lineage of 20th century maximalist experimentation—from
Joyce to Pynchon to Wallace—they also seem to disrupt the periodizing narrative
of modernism’s conclusion on or about 1945.
Alternatively, it seems equally plausible that, when taken as a whole, modernism
may be far less novel than we thought—that these statistically significant texts
are, in fact, outliers. Recently, scholars of literary modernism have moved away
from novelty as an explanatory feature of periodicity, instead considering modernism’s relationship to the mundane, the quotidian, the obsolete, the ordinary,
and the everyday.20 No connection between modernism and intratextual novelty would, in itself, be a fascinating result. While modernism is often defined
by such figures as Joyce and Faulkner, a larger corpus of modernist fiction could
reveal the exemplarity or exceptionality of their writing in the context of their
19 William James, “The Compounding of Consciousness” in Writings: 1902-1910 (New York: Library of America, 1987): 715.
20 Mark Goble writes, “It might even be the case that modernism persists for us today largely as
an aesthetic of obsolescence… precisely because we no longer feel required to insist on modernism’s
novelty as the most important measure of its value,” (147). See “Obsolescence” in Eric Hayot and
Rebecca Walkowitz, A New Vocabulary for Global Modernism. (New York: Columbia UP, 2016): 146.
See also Liesl Olson, Modernism and the Ordinary. (New York: Oxford UP, 2009). Juan A Suárez,
Pop Modernism: Noise and the Reinvention of the Everyday. (Champagne: U Illinois P, 2007). Bryony
Randall, Modernism, Daily Time and Everyday Life. (New York: Cambridge UP, 2007).

22

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

contemporaries, widening or narrowing the Great Divide accordingly.
Finally, what of The Color Purple? Among our statistically significant results,
it is the only novel written by a woman, and the only novel written by a person of color—authors who tend to be written out of the history of High Modernism (capital-H, capital-M) and, for the most part, postmodernism. On the
one hand, The Color Purple’s presence may suggest limitations of the measurement—dialogue mistaken for formal innovation. But perhaps the significance of
The Color Purple prompts a reconsideration of the whitened and masculinized genealogy of 20th century experimentation. Perhaps Walker’s formal innovations,
as revealed by the Bloom Filter, challenge notions of literary experimentation
and novelty.
While these questions are provocative, they cannot be answered without expansion of this study and more creative applications of the Bloom Filter. As with
any new form of measurement or hypothesis, only replication will validate the
hypotheses we propose here. But we believe that this method is promising, particularly for scholars of literary modernism, and it is our hope that even more
novel uses for the Bloom Filter might emerge in time.

Appendix: Corpus
PubYear

AuthorName

Title

intervals

lexicaldiversity

r2

slope

1958
1972
1907
2008
1847
1850
1872
2012
1869
2010
1868
1879
2013
1864
1940
1891
1900
2013
1985
1811
1813
1813
1814
1814
1815
1916
1878
2005
2011
1885
1900

Achebe,Chinua
Adams,Richard
Ade,George
Adiga,Aravind
Aguilar,Grace
Aguilar,Grace
Ainsworth,William
Albom,Mitch
Alcott,Louisa
Alexie,Sherman
Alger, Horatio
Alger, Horatio
AlireSaenz,Benjamin
Anon
Armstrong,Margaret
Atherton,Gertrude
Atherton,Gertrude
Atkinson,Kate
Atwood,Margaret
Austen,Jane
Austen,Jane
Austen,Jane
Austen,Jane
Austen,Jane
Austen,Jane
Baily, Waldron
Ballantyne,RM
Banville,John
Barnes,Julian
Barr,Amelia
Barr,Amelia

ThingsFallApart
WatershipDown
TheSlimPrincess
TheWhiteTiger
HomeInfluence
ValeofCedars
TheRoyalOak
TimeKeeper
LittleWomen
WarDances
RaggedDick
TelegraphBoy
EverythingBeginsandEndsattheKentucky
FromPillarToPost
Trelawney
AQuestionOfTime
SenatorNorth
LifeAfterLife
TheHandmaidsTale
SenseandSensibility
PrideandPrejudice
PrideandPrejudice
MansfieldPark
MansfieldPark
Emma
Thehomewardtrail
InTheTrackOfTheTroops
TheSea
SenseofAn
JanVeeder’sWife
TheMaidofMaidenLane

28
92
12
46
96
54
96
21
100
24
26
20
32
33
148
21
56
81
53
67
68
68
88
88
88
33
51
33
23
35
44

0.103
0.061
0.202
0.103
0.055
0.097
0.081
0.153
0.061
0.153
0.1
0.103
0.089
0.131
0.066
0.152
0.089
0.106
0.102
0.064
0.057
0.056
0.053
0.053
0.063
0.135
0.113
0.153
0.145
0.107
0.092

0.8736
0.7903
0.8533
0.7345
0.8134
0.848
0.833
0.9478
0.8324
0.6533
0.7974
0.7365
0.8372
0.9375
0.2623
0.8102
0.9115
0.7972
0.7753
0.8192
0.8506
0.8336
0.8699
0.8698
0.8675
0.9158
0.8213
0.9318
0.934
0.8405
0.9127

-0.0069
-0.0028
-0.006
-0.0034
-0.0026
-0.0036
-0.0026
-0.0076
-0.0021
-0.0048
-0.0054
-0.0054
-0.0059
-0.0026
-0.0051
-0.0045
-0.0029
-0.0028
-0.0028
-0.0033
-0.0035
-0.0035
-0.0028
-0.0028
-0.0027
-0.0041
-0.0022
-0.0042
-0.0063
-0.0044
-0.0039

23

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

PubYear

AuthorName

Title

intervals

lexicaldiversity

r2

slope

1911
1786
2006
1887
1902
1964
1902
2005
1993
1913
1869
1996
1796
1843
1981
2008
1862
1864
1883
1862
1848
1847
1847
1847
1847
1890
1798
1799
2013
1856
1994
1994
1778
1782
1796
1917
1959
1917
1843
1865
1871
1912
2013
2011
1857
1901
1836
1890
1899
1899
2008
2011
1930
2014
1852
1859
1860
1868
2012
1899
1899
1907
1921
1826
1823
1853
1856
1945
1892
1895
1895
1911
1898
1920
1920
1861
1920
2013
1985

Barrie,J.M.
Beckford,William
Behrens,Peter
Bellamy,Edward
Bellamy,Edward
Bellow,Saul
Bennett,Arnold
Bergen,David
Bickmore,Barbara
Biggers,EarlDerr
Blackmore,R.D.
Blake,Jennifer
Bonhote,Elizabeth
Borrow,George
Bowie,Donald
Boyden,Joseph
Braddon,Mary
Braddon,Mary
Braddon,Mary
Braddon,MaryElizabeth
Bronte,Ann
Bronte,Charlotte
Bronte,Charlotte
Bronte,Emily
Bronte,Emily
Broughton,Rhoda
Brown,CharlesBrockden
Brown,CharlesBrockden
Brown,Dan
Browning,ElizabethBarrett
Bunn,TDavis
Bunn,TDavis
Burney,Fanny
Burney,Fanny
Burney,Fanny
Burroughs,EdgarRice
Burroughs,William
Cahan,Abraham
Carlyle,Thomas
Carroll,Lewis
Carroll,Lewis
Cather,Willa
Catton,Eleanor
Chan,Darcie
Chatterton,Georgiana
Chesnutt,Mary
Child,Lydia
Chopin,Kate
Chopin,Kate
Chopin,Kate
Christensen,Kate
Clark,MaryHiggins
Coates,RobertM
Coben,Harlan
Collins,Wilkie
Collins,Wilkie
Collins,Wilkie
Collins,Wilkie
Connelly,Michael
Conrad,Joseph
Conrad,Joseph
Conrad,Joseph
Conrad,Joseph
Cooper,JameFenimore
Cooper,JamesFenimore
Craik,Dinah
Craik,Dinah
Crane,Frances
Crane,Stephen
Crane,Stephen
Crane,Stephen
Crockett,Samuel
Crockett,SR
Cullum,Ridgwell
Curwood,JamesOliver
Davis,Lydia
Day,Clarence
Day,Sylvia
DeLillo,DonWhite

PeterPan
Vathek
LawofDreams
LookingBackward
Eleonora
Herzog
GrandBabylonHotel
TheTimeinBetween
DistantStar
SevenKeystoBaldPate
LornaDoone
SilverTonguedDevil
BungayCastle
TheBibleinSpain
CableHarbor
ThroughBlackSpruce
LadyAudley’sSecret
HenryDunbar
TheGoldenCalf
LadyAudleysSecret
TheTenantofWildfellHall
JaneEyre
JaneEyre
WutheringHeights
WutheringHeights
Alas!
Wieland
ArthurMervyn
Inferno
AuroraLeigh
RidersofthePaleHorse
RidersofthePaleHorse
Evelina
Cecilia
Camilla
TarzanoftheApes
Naked Lunch
TheRiseofDavidLevinsky
PastandPresent
Alice’sAdventureinWonderland
ThroughtheLookingGlass.txt
Alexander’sBridge
Luminaries
TheMillRiverRecluse
Lifeanditsrealities
MarrowofTradition
Philothea
AtFault
TheAwakening
TheAwakening
GreatMan
IllWalkAlone
TheOutlawYears
MissingYou
Basil
WomaninWhite
TheWomaninWhite
Moonstone
TheBlackBox
HeartofDarkness
HeartofDarkness
SecretAgent
TheShadowLine
TheLastoftheMohicans
ThePioneers
Agatha’sHusband
JohnHalifax
TheIndigoNecklae
MaggieGirlOfTheStreets
TheRedBadgeofCourage
RedBadgeOfCourage
Theladyofthehundreddresses
TheRedAxe
TheheartofUnaga
TheValleyofSilentMen
LifeintheIronMills
TheSimianWorld
EntwinedwithYou
Noise

25
21
63
44
42
77
38
42
100
43
142
60
49
124
69
70
82
86
89
82
93
104
102
66
64
83
47
84
91
48
49
49
86
186
204
48
49
92
62
14
16
14
155
66
28
50
42
33
27
28
49
51
38
62
63
135
135
105
62
21
21
52
21
83
95
78
98
33
13
25
26
42
59
72
40
8
8
60
59

0.106
0.174
0.089
0.105
0.121
0.12
0.104
0.086
0.072
0.136
0.054
0.1
0.089
0.073
0.111
0.068
0.076
0.073
0.084
0.076
0.083
0.091
0.08
0.1
0.087
0.092
0.091
0.068
0.101
0.122
0.125
0.105
0.062
0.039
0.041
0.091
0.142
0.07
0.12
0.104
0.108
0.141
0.073
0.085
0.122
0.102
0.103
0.148
0.122
0.121
0.126
0.083
0.148
0.097
0.084
0.052
0.052
0.055
0.088
0.159
0.159
0.114
0.136
0.068
0.075
0.081
0.081
0.101
0.189
0.138
0.138
0.124
0.091
0.076
0.088
0.208
0.234
0.092
0.133

0.7937
0.9269
0.829
0.6479
0.9143
0.8867
0.8547
0.8866
0.8607
0.8341
0.8561
0.9034
0.8389
0.8107
0.917
0.8851
0.841
0.7223
0.839
0.8381
0.8499
0.8442
0.8431
0.9305
0.9458
0.8363
0.8579
0.5781
0.7628
0.8034
0.8485
0.8672
0.8258
0.737
0.805
0.8119
0.7496
0.8991
0.5318
0.9473
0.8999
0.92
0.8215
0.768
0.9227
0.8532
0.8748
0.8695
0.8661
0.8714
0.85
0.8748
0.8213
0.7807
0.8294
0.812
0.8122
0.8177
0.7005
0.9219
0.922
0.8234
0.9035
0.8947
0.8625
0.8994
0.9295
0.9166
0.4886
0.8439
0.8636
0.7131
0.8864
0.9282
0.905
0.9627
0.5559
0.842
0.8018

-0.0051
-0.0068
-0.0024
-0.0035
-0.0042
-0.002
-0.004
-0.0058
-0.0025
-0.0027
-0.0016
-0.0034
-0.0047
-0.002
-0.003
-0.0028
-0.0029
-0.0025
-0.0021
-0.0025
-0.0026
-0.0015
-0.0013
-0.0031
-0.0024
-0.0023
-0.0043
-0.0021
-0.0024
-0.0018
-0.003
-0.004
-0.0029
-0.0014
-0.0013
-0.0035
-0.0028
-0.0025
-0.0024
-0.0145
-0.0102
-0.008
-0.0022
-0.0033
-0.006
-0.003
-0.0044
-0.0041
-0.005
-0.0044
-0.0038
-0.0047
-0.0031
-0.0036
-0.0028
-0.002
-0.002
-0.0023
-0.003
-0.0056
-0.0056
-0.0033
-0.0053
-0.0032
-0.0023
-0.0025
-0.0021
-0.0059
-0.008
-0.0057
-0.0048
-0.0022
-0.003
-0.0026
-0.005
-0.0076
-0.0054
-0.0038
-0.0027

24

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

PubYear

AuthorName

Title

intervals

lexicaldiversity

r2

slope

1853
1859
1861
1861
1826
1837
1920
1921
1889
1891
1900
1900
1912
1915
1896
1987
1800
1801
1806
1860
1861
1862
1871
1876
1952
1988
1988
1929
1930
1873
2012
1920
1922
1925
1934
2014
1856
1993
2012
2012
1915
1924
1915
1908
1910
1908
1910
1996
1797
2014
1980
1894
1821
1848
1848
1854
1854
2012
1891
1891
1893
1893
1794
1979
1990
1893
1916
1870
2009
2006
1897
1885
1874
1891
1891
1895
1893
1922
1850

Dickens,Charles
Dickens,Charles
Dickens,Charles
Dickens,Charles
Disraeli,Benjamin
Disraeli,Benjamin
DosPassos,John
DosPassos,John
Doyle,ArthurConan
Doyle,ArthurConan
Dreiser,Theodore
Dreiser,Theodore
Dreiser,Theodore
Dreiser,Theodore
Dunbar,PaulLaurence
Dvorkin,David
Edgeworth,Maria
Edgeworth,Maria
Edgeworth,Maria
Eliot,George
Eliot,George
Eliot,George
Eliot,George
Eliot,George
Ellison,Ralph
Fante,John
Farelly,Peter
Faulkner,William
Faulkner,William
Fawcett,Edgar
Ferguson,Will
Fitzgerald,FScott
Fitzgerald,FScott
Fitzgerald,FScott
Fitzgerald,FScott
Flanagan,Richard
Flaubert,Gustave
Flook,Maria
Flynn,Gillian
Follett,Ken
Ford,FordMaddox
Ford,FordMaddox
Ford,FordMadox
Forster,E.M.
Forster,E.M.
Forster,EM
Forster,EM
Foster,David
Foster,HannahWebster
Fowler,KarenJoy
Freed,Donald
Freeman,MaryWilkins
Galt,John
Gaskell,Elizabeth
Gaskell,Elizabeth
Gaskell,Elizabeth
Gaskell,Elizabeth
Giffin,Emily
Gissing,George
Gissing,George
Gissing,George
Gissing,George
Godwin,William
Gordimer,Nadine
Graham,Heather
Grand,Sarah
Grey,Zan
Griffith,Cecil
Grisham,John
Gruen,Sara
HaggardRider
Hammond,William
Hardy,Thomas
Hardy,Thomas
Hardy,Thomas
Hardy,Thomas
Harraden,Beatrice
Hart,FrancisRussel
Hawthorne,Nathaniel

BleakHouse
ATaleofTwoCities
GreatExpectations
GreatExpectations
VivianGrey
Venetia
ThreeSoldiers
ThreeSoldiers
TheMysteryoftheCloomber
TheDoingsofRafflesHaw
SisterCarrie
SisterCarrie
TheFinancier
TheGenius
TheUncalled
Budspy
CastleRackrent
Belinda
Leonora
TheMillontheFloss
SilasMarner
Romola
Middlemarch
DanielDeronda
InvisibleMan
FullofLife
OutsideProvidence
SoundAndTheFury
AsILayDying
Purpleandfinelinen
419
ThisSideofParadise
TheBeautifulandtheDamned
TheGreatGatsby
TenderIsTheNight
NarrowRoad
MadameBovary
FamilyNight
GoneGirl
WinteroftheWorld
TheGoodSoldier
ParadesEnd
TheGoodSoldier
ARoomWithaView
HowardsEnd
RoomWithAView
HowardsEnd
InfiniteJest
TheCoquette
WeareAll
TheChinaCard
Pembroke
AnnalsoftheParish
MaryBarton
MaryBarton
NorthandSouth
NorthAndsouth
WhereWeBelong
NewGrubStreet
NewGrubStreet
TheOddWomen
OddWomen
CalebWilliams
BurgersDaughter
TheVikingsWoman
TheHeavenlyTwins
TheBorderLegion
Valentine Forde
TheAssociate
WaterforElephants
Jess
Astrong-mindedwoman
FarFromtheMaddingCrowd
TessoftheD’Urbervilles
TessoftheD’Urbervilles
JudetheObscure
ShipsThatPassintheNight
AdmiralsoftheCaribbean
TheScarletLetter

193
75
99
99
109
91
73
74
26
20
87
87
109
168
27
50
18
100
36
114
39
128
178
174
102
21
25
52
30
81
64
41
72
26
61
67
65
42
86
185
41
112
41
37
62
37
61
328
29
46
48
44
35
87
87
99
99
60
102
102
77
77
81
73
70
156
55
24
61
57
60
82
76
83
83
80
20
28
48

0.051
0.079
0.067
0.067
0.069
0.062
0.073
0.073
0.135
0.137
0.068
0.068
0.067
0.052
0.118
0.11
0.122
0.06
0.103
0.068
0.108
0.075
0.058
0.058
0.083
0.154
0.152
0.086
0.102
0.09
0.125
0.138
0.11
0.13
0.112
0.093
0.095
0.138
0.098
0.066
0.101
0.091
0.101
0.113
0.093
0.112
0.093
0.087
0.101
0.115
0.148
0.091
0.11
0.068
0.068
0.067
0.066
0.104
0.059
0.059
0.072
0.071
0.068
0.127
0.07
0.054
0.093
0.123
0.1
0.1
0.084
0.08
0.088
0.093
0.092
0.086
0.104
0.146
0.114

0.8468
0.8459
0.8347
0.835
0.7809
0.7799
0.696
0.7176
0.7506
0.9304
0.7411
0.7692
0.7517
0.7869
0.6974
0.9017
0.7517
0.824
0.9008
0.831
0.8683
0.9069
0.8904
0.7949
0.839
0.933
0.9118
0.0915
0.8585
0.8547
0.8774
0.8811
0.9354
0.942
0.8795
0.7992
0.9285
0.9053
0.7247
0.8035
0.8972
0.8491
0.8882
0.9205
0.9059
0.9099
0.9168
0.8222
0.7815
0.8455
0.8964
0.7451
0.842
0.9286
0.9366
0.8538
0.8503
0.9385
0.8537
0.8586
0.9089
0.903
0.8674
0.8128
0.8492
0.8379
0.8705
0.9268
0.9048
0.8667
0.9307
0.8408
0.9281
0.9056
0.9177
0.8954
0.8539
0.8516
0.93

-0.0013
-0.0024
-0.002
-0.002
-0.002
-0.0024
-0.0023
-0.0021
-0.0043
-0.0068
-0.0025
-0.0023
-0.0022
-0.0014
-0.0033
-0.0041
-0.0067
-0.0025
-0.0052
-0.0019
-0.0039
-0.0021
-0.0016
-0.0013
-0.0022
-0.0065
-0.0064
-9e-04
-0.0051
-0.0024
-0.0024
-0.0027
-0.0026
-0.0049
-0.0025
-0.0029
-0.0028
-0.0047
-0.002
-0.0013
-0.0044
-0.0019
-0.0052
-0.0036
-0.0031
-0.0032
-0.0023
-7e-04
-0.0053
-0.0036
-0.0031
-0.004
-0.005
-0.0024
-0.002
-0.0022
-0.0019
-0.004
-0.0023
-0.002
-0.003
-0.0025
-0.003
-0.0021
-0.0033
-0.0017
-0.0032
-0.0055
-0.0031
-0.0041
-0.0028
-0.0024
-0.0025
-0.0026
-0.0022
-0.002
-0.008
-0.0071
-0.004

25

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

PubYear

AuthorName

Title

intervals

lexicaldiversity

r2

slope

1851
2007
1796
1965
1926
1949
1949
1904
1919
2008
1822
1885
1894
2007
1885
1917
1922
1989
2010
2011
1881
1898
1903
1903
1913
2005
1978
1984
1991
1914
1916
1916
1922
1922
1912
1891
1957
2011
2014
1849
1853
1988
1894
1900
1995
2006
2006
1964
1913
1913
1928
1795
1805
1918
1917
1903
1903
1904
1906
1909
1987
1884
2009
1771
1855
1930
2009
1921
1892
1986
1838
1919
1865
1851
2008
2014
1989
1992
1809

Hawthorne,Nathaniel
Hay,Elizabeth
Hays,Mary
Heller,Joseph
Hemingway,Ernest
Hemingway,Ernest
Hemingway,Ernest
Henry-Ruffin,MargaretEllen
Hergesheimer,Joseph
Hilderbrand,Elin
Hogg,James
Hollis,Margery
Hope,Anthony
Hosseini,Khaled
Howells,WilliamDean
Howells,WilliamDean
Hudson,WH
Irving,John
Jacobson,Howard
James,EL
James,Henry
James,Henry
James,Henry
James,Henry
James,Stephens
Jin,Ha
Johnson,Joyce
Johnstone,WilliamW
Jones,MatthewF
Joyce,James
Joyce,James
Joyce,James
Joyce,James
Joyce,James
Keays,Hersilia
Kelley,Emma
Kerouac,Jack
King,Stephen
King,Thomas
Kingsley,Charles
Kingsley,Charles
Kingsolver,Barbara
Kipling,Rudyard
Kipling,Rudyard
Korman,Keith
Lam,Vincent
Larsson,Stieg
Laurence,Margaret
Laut,Agnes
Lawrence,D.H.
Lawrence,DH
Lewis,Matthew
Lewis,Matthew
Lewis,Sinclai
Lewis,Sinclair
London,Jack
London,Jack
London,Jack
London,Jack
London,Jack
Longyear,BarryB
Lyall,Edna
Macintyre,Linden
Mackenzie,Henry
Manning,Anne
Mansfield,Katherine
Mantel,Hilary
Maquis,Don
Marsham,Clara
Martin,Lori
Martineau,Harriet
Maugham,WSomerset
Mayhew,Augustus
Melville,Hermann
Meyer,Stephanie
Michaels,Sean
Miller,GWayne
Mitchell,VE
More,Hannah

TheHouseoftheSevenGables
LateNights
EmmaCourtney
Catch22
TheSunAlsoRises
ForWhomTheBellTolls
ForWhomTheBellTolls
TheNorthStar
JavaHead
Barefoot
ThreePerilsofMan
AnthonyFairfax
ThePrisonerofZenda
AThousandSplendid
SilasLapham
ConfessionsStAugustine
ACrystalAge
APrayerforOwenMeany
FinklerQuestion
FiftyShadesofGrey
PortraitofaLady
TurnoftheScrew copy
TheAmbassadors
TheAmbassadors copy
TheCrockofGold
WarTrash
BadConnections
TheLastMountainMan
TheCooterFarm
Dubliners
APortraitoftheArtistasaYoungMan
PortraitofanArtist
Ulysses
Ulysses
TheroadtoDamascus
Megda
OntheRoad
DoctorSleep
TheBackoftheTurtle
AltonLocke
Hypatia
The Bean Trees
TheJungleBook
Kim
SecretDreams
BloodlettingandMiraculousCures
TheGirlWhoPlayedWithFire
TheStoneAngel
The new dawn
SonsandLovers
LadyChatterleysLover
TheMonk
TheBravoofVenice
TheJob
TheInnocents
TheCalloftheWild
CallOfTheWild
SeaWitch
WhiteFang
MartinEden
SeaOfGlass
WeTwo
BishopsMan
TheManofFeeling
TheoldChelseabun-house
TheAloe
WolfHall
TheOldSoak
CousinSimon
TheDarklingHills
Deerbrook
TheMoonandSixpence
Facesforfortunes
MobyDick
TheHost
UsConductors
ThunderRise
Imbalance
CoelebsinSearchofaWife

59
55
37
117
36
98
94
45
39
81
114
22
28
59
69
6
34
141
64
85
124
22
86
86
30
74
35
46
50
36
46
46
151
151
52
50
63
95
63
93
91
48
27
58
89
47
106
51
72
87
64
78
19
53
24
17
17
58
40
77
56
94
59
20
29
14
120
12
24
55
122
41
33
121
117
54
79
47
78

0.108
0.113
0.13
0.089
0.08
0.064
0.059
0.094
0.127
0.092
0.073
0.127
0.104
0.106
0.069
0.251
0.111
0.093
0.102
0.08
0.054
0.118
0.07
0.069
0.117
0.089
0.135
0.085
0.109
0.112
0.112
0.112
0.115
0.115
0.09
0.084
0.099
0.087
0.106
0.097
0.086
0.107
0.1
0.112
0.089
0.129
0.073
0.119
0.107
0.067
0.081
0.069
0.144
0.144
0.181
0.153
0.153
0.101
0.102
0.086
0.086
0.065
0.101
0.153
0.133
0.172
0.076
0.17
0.114
0.087
0.059
0.107
0.17
0.094
0.065
0.122
0.105
0.113
0.076

0.8654
0.8808
0.9309
0.4496
0.7745
0.6143
0.6904
0.8521
0.9526
0.717
0.7561
0.9318
0.8883
0.8472
0.8539
0.7568
0.8152
0.7797
0.7956
0.7231
0.9044
0.9356
0.8998
0.903
0.5269
0.8432
0.8422
0.9012
0.8929
0.8226
0.3068
0.3089
0.5951
0.594
0.8967
0.7992
0.8122
0.8531
0.8356
0.7559
0.9016
0.7685
0.7808
0.7295
0.8211
0.6064
0.8112
0.7517
0.8381
0.938
0.8141
0.8204
0.9502
0.8826
0.7957
0.8357
0.8556
0.8983
0.8613
0.8718
0.6866
0.8668
0.8583
0.8513
0.8851
0.8654
0.8393
0.0443
0.9046
0.8897
0.8341
0.7586
0.8883
0.7734
0.8267
0.7951
0.8445
0.8847
0.8515

-0.0028
-0.0034
-0.0053
-0.0013
-0.0054
-0.0019
-0.002
-0.0029
-0.0044
-0.0024
-0.0017
-0.0047
-0.0053
-0.0027
-0.003
-0.0071
-0.0037
-0.0016
-0.003
-0.003
-0.0023
-0.005
-0.0027
-0.0024
-0.0029
-0.003
-0.0046
-0.005
-0.0039
-0.0047
-0.0014
-0.0014
-8e-04
-8e-04
-0.0045
-0.0035
-0.0024
-0.0024
-0.0033
-0.0015
-0.002
-0.0034
-0.0045
-0.002
-0.0021
-0.0021
-0.0026
-0.0034
-0.0015
-0.0031
-0.0027
-0.0032
-0.0093
-0.0028
-0.0039
-0.0065
-0.005
-0.0027
-0.005
-0.0022
-0.002
-0.0023
-0.0036
-0.0062
-0.0027
-0.0068
-0.0017
-0.002
-0.0056
-0.0032
-0.0019
-0.0037
-0.002
-0.0014
-0.0021
-0.003
-0.0025
-0.0041
-0.0027

26

Cultural Analytics

Measuring Modernist Novelty

PubYear

AuthorName

Title

intervals

lexicaldiversity

r2

slope

2013
1985
1987
1904
1998
1958
1877
1901
1899
1901
1901
1903
1952
2009
1804
1905
1949
2012
2009
1815
1818
1821
1991
2010
1986
1963
1838
2006
1892
1993
2009
1973
1790
1794
1938
1903
1921
2008
1915
1902
1857
2010
2014
1886
2007
1794
1989
1980
1915
1892
1883
1814
1814
1817
1820
1921
1877
2008
1818
1819
1994
1906
1906
1917
1983
2010
1991
2000
1771
1992
2012
2010
1906
1909
1933
1913
1882
1886
1886

Moriarty,Liane
Morris,Janet
Morrison,Toni
Murfree,MaryNoailles
Myers,Tamar
Nabokov,Vladimir
Neville,Constance
Nordau,Max
Norris,Frank
Norris,Frank
Norris,Frank
Norris,Frank
OConnor,Flannery
ONeill,Joseph
Opie,Amelia
Orczy,Emma
Orwell,George
Otsuka,Julie
Patterson,James
Peacock,ThomasLove
Peacock,ThomasLove
Peacock,ThomasLove
Philbrick,Rodman
Picoult,Jodi
Plain,Belva
Plath,Sylvia
Poe,EdgarAllen
Powers,Richard
Praed,Campbell
Proulx,EAnnie
Pullinger,Kate
Pynchon,Thomas
Radcliffe,Ann
Radcliffe,Ann
Rawlings,MarjorieKinman
Read,Opie
Rhodes,EugeneManlove
Ricci,Nino
Richardson,Dorothy
Rives,Hallie
Rives,Judith
Roberts,Nora
Roberts,Nora
Roe,Edward
Roth,Philip
Rowson,Susanna
Rule,Jane
Rushdie,Salman
Sabatini,Rafael
Savage,Richard
Schreiner,Olive
Scott,Walter
Scott,Walter
Scott,Walter
Scott,Walter
Seltzer,Charles
Sewell,Anna
Shaffer,MaryAnn
Shelley,Mary
Shelley,Mary
Shields,Carol
Sinclair,Upton
Sinclair,Upton
Sinclair,Upton
Singer,Shelley
Skibsrud,Johanna
Smiley,Jane
Smith,Zadie
Smollett,Tobias
Sontag,Susan
Spalding,Linda
Sparks,Nicholas
Stein,Gertrude
Stein,Gertrude
Stein,Gertrude
Stevenson,George
Stevenson,RobertLouis
Stevenson,RobertLouis
Stevenson,RobertLouis

TheHusbandsSecret
BeyonTtheVeil
Beloved
TheFrontiersman
BetweenaWokandaHardPlace
Lolita
BehindTheArras
Thecomedyofsentiment
McTeague
TheOctopus
TheOctopus
ThePit
WiseBlood
Netherland
AdelineMowbray
TheScarletPimpernel
NineteenEightyFour
BuddhaIn
8thConfession
HeadlongHall
NightmareAbbey
MaidMarian
TheSeventhSleeper
HouseRules
TheGoldenCup
TheBellJar
TheNarrativeofArthurGordonPym
EchoMaker
RomannceofachaÃÇlet
TheShippingNews
MistressofNothing
GravitysRainbow
ASicilianRomance
TheMysteriesofUdolpho
TheYearling
TheHarkriders
StepsonsOfLight
OriginofSpecies
PointedRoofs
HeartsCourageous
HomeAndTheWorld
SavortheMoment
TheCollector
Hefellinlovewithhiswife
Everyman
CharlotteTemple
AftertheFire
MidnightsChildren
TheSeaHawk
ThelittleladyofLagunitas
StoryofanAfricanFarm
Waverley
Waverly
RobRoy
Ivanhoe
DragHarlan
BlackBeauty
TheGuernseyLiteraryandPotatoPeelPie
Frankenstein
Mathilda
TheStoneDiaries
TheJungle
TheJungle
KingCoal
SamsonsDeal
Sentimentalists
AThousandAcres
WhiteTeeth
TheExpedictionofHenryClinker
TheVolcanoLoverARomance
Purchase
SafeHaven
ThreeLives
ThreeLives
AutobiographyofAliceBToklas
Topham’sfolly
TreasureIsland
JekyllandHyde
JekyllandHyde

63
60
54
38
37
68
64
27
63
111
111
69
27
48
61
48
59
19
39
16
15
20
58
98
85
39
56
97
39
62
43
198
39
167
69
36
30
101
32
46
61
53
81
56
21
20
33
126
66
71
53
114
110
91
101
20
30
40
42
20
58
80
80
67
40
29
72
102
85
79
53
64
44
44
50
47
36
13
13

0.092
0.115
0.09
0.15
0.143
0.146
0.095
0.131
0.086
0.074
0.074
0.089
0.095
0.155
0.075
0.094
0.092
0.157
0.14
0.211
0.185
0.156
0.123
0.081
0.084
0.117
0.101
0.106
0.11
0.119
0.093
0.102
0.091
0.04
0.069
0.112
0.145
0.092
0.132
0.139
0.108
0.106
0.091
0.083
0.146
0.124
0.111
0.105
0.092
0.111
0.076
0.085
0.086
0.098
0.083
0.128
0.071
0.125
0.097
0.131
0.134
0.078
0.078
0.078
0.102
0.108
0.09
0.103
0.101
0.103
0.09
0.08
0.039
0.039
0.073
0.113
0.096
0.162
0.162

0.8817
0.9233
0.828
0.8395
0.917
0.8938
0.9134
0.9544
0.7337
0.7418
0.7762
0.8796
0.7328
0.8935
0.9052
0.8617
0.4507
0.3525
0.8603
0.7514
0.8041
0.547
0.8739
0.9029
0.8622
0.8863
0.2393
0.834
0.7847
0.8146
0.8986
0.8421
0.8761
0.8155
0.8754
0.9014
0.8796
0.7616
0.8702
0.807
0.8886
0.8673
0.754
0.9008
0.742
0.8619
0.9432
0.8453
0.9108
0.692
0.6992
0.809
0.8393
0.7897
0.7505
0.8703
0.897
0.6894
0.8633
0.839
0.8696
0.6554
0.6632
0.7987
0.8723
0.7117
0.8107
0.7345
0.9107
0.8122
0.85
0.5368
0.7235
0.7238
0.8553
0.8483
0.8473
0.5968
0.5621

-0.0038
-0.0025
-0.0033
-0.0042
-0.0041
-0.0019
-0.0026
-0.0043
-0.0026
-0.0017
-0.0015
-0.0029
-0.006
-0.0029
-0.0038
-0.0036
-0.0028
-0.0039
-0.0039
-0.0077
-0.0075
-0.0041
-0.0026
-0.0028
-0.0023
-0.0056
-0.0017
-0.0019
-0.004
-0.0024
-0.0053
-9e-04
-0.0064
-0.0019
-0.0033
-0.0038
-0.0038
-0.0019
-0.0052
-0.0022
-0.0033
-0.0035
-0.0023
-0.0028
-0.0045
-0.0082
-0.0061
-0.0015
-0.0029
-0.0015
-0.0023
-0.0019
-0.0018
-0.002
-0.0018
-0.0043
-0.0051
-0.0026
-0.0045
-0.0046
-0.0023
-0.0023
-0.002
-0.0026
-0.005
-0.0081
-0.0027
-0.0017
-0.003
-0.0024
-0.003
-0.0028
-0.0076
-0.0064
-0.0039
-0.0028
-0.0038
-0.0053
-0.0042

27

Laura B. McGrath, Devin Higgins, and Arend Hintze

Cultural Analytics

PubYear

AuthorName

Title

intervals

lexicaldiversity

r2

slope

2009
1897
1897
1997
1853
1990
1924
1880
1847
1848
1857
1857
1869
1875
1876
1888
1837
1855
1876
1876
1884
1884
1896
1889
2009
1969
1982
1888
2010
1917
1893
1895
1918
1905
1905
1911
1911
1913
1920
1920
1890
1890
1914
1994
1982
1894
1987
1788
1798
1922
1925
1925
1927
1927
1928
2008
1844
1850
1853
1979
2007

Stockett,Kathryn
Stoker,Bram
Stoker,Bram
Stone,Michael
Stowe,HarrietBeecher
Stoyenoff,NormaDavis
Stribling,TS
Tabor,Eliza
Thackeray,William
Thackeray,William
Trollope,Anthony
Trollope,Anthony
Trollope,Anthony
Trollope,Anthony
Trollope,FrancesEleanor
Trollope,FrancesEleanor
Trollope,FrancesMilton
Trollope,FrancesMilton
Twain,Mark
Twain,Mark
Twain,Mark
Twain,Mark
Upward,Allen
Van Dyke,Theodore
Verghese,Abraham
Vonnegut,Kurt
Walker,Alice
Ward,Mrs.Humphry
Warren,Dianne
Webb,Mary
Wedmore,Frederick
Wells,H.G.
West,Nathaniel
Wharton,Edith
Wharton,Edith
Wharton,Edith
Wharton,Edith
Wharton,Edith
Wharton,Edith
Wharton,Edith
Wilde,Oscar
Wilde,Oscar
Williams,Irving
Willis,Connie
Wilson,Steve
Wolf,Emma
Wolfe,Tom
Wollstonecraft,Mary
Wollstonecraft,Mary
Woolf,Virginia
Woolf,Virginia
Woolf,Virginia
Woolf,Virginia
Woolf,Virginia
Woolf,Virginia
Wroblewski,David
Yonge,Charlotte
Yonge,Charlotte
Yonge,Charlotte
Yorgason,BlaineM TheWindwalker
Young,WilliamP

TheHelp
Dracula
Dracula
ALongReach
UncleTom’sCabin
OneNighttoRemember
RedSand
ASylvanQueen
VanityFair
VanityFair
BarchesterTowers
BarchesterTowers
PhineasFinn
TheWayWeLiveNow
ACharmingFellow
ThatUnfortunateMarriage
TheVicarofWrexham
TheWidowBarnaby
TheAdventuresofTomSawyer
TomSawyer
TheAdventuresofHuckleberryFinn
HuckFinn
Acrownofstraw
RifleRodAndGuninCalifornia
CuttingforStone
Slaughterhouse
TheColorPurple
RobertElsmere
CoolWater
GonetoEart
Renunciations
TheTimeMachine
ReturnOfTheSoldier
TheHouseofMirth
HouseOfMirth copy
EthanFrome
EthanFrome
CustomoftheCountry
TheAgeofInnocence
AgeofInnocence
ThePictureofDorianGray
PictureofDorianGrey
BigWallace
UnchartedTerritory
DealersWheels
Aprodigalinlove
TheBonfireoftheVanities
Mary
Maria
JacobsRoom
Mrs.Dalloway
MrsDalloway
TotheLighthouse
ToTheLighthouse
Orlando
TheStoryofEdgarSawtelle
Abbeychurch
Henrietta’sWish
TheHeirofRedcliffe

88
83
84
43
100
19
36
91
170
170
108
109
140
190
103
95
95
110
38
38
56
56
45
48
118
28
39
163
56
45
7
17
16
73
73
18
18
78
57
58
42
42
22
22
33
39
147
13
25
31
35
35
38
38
43
107
40
48
128
11
44

0.071
0.061
0.065
0.104
0.077
0.146
0.125
0.095
0.063
0.063
0.059
0.06
0.046
0.041
0.07
0.072
0.065
0.055
0.12
0.116
0.067
0.066
0.106
0.108
0.089
0.143
0.082
0.066
0.089
0.11
0.25
0.149
0.156
0.092
0.092
0.137
0.136
0.089
0.102
0.101
0.092
0.093
0.141
0.117
0.132
0.122
0.086
0.176
0.141
0.146
0.12
0.12
0.104
0.104
0.123
0.073
0.088
0.082
0.052
0.116
0.105

0.8418
0.8644
0.848
0.8614
0.8111
0.9275
0.8056
0.8215
0.8688
0.8651
0.797
0.7942
0.8299
0.8332
0.8834
0.8846
0.8359
0.9066
0.8929
0.8898
0.8902
0.8843
0.8764
0.4028
0.8489
0.8838
0.2819
0.8524
0.9373
0.9404
0.7301
0.7821
0.9013
0.9023
0.9014
0.9614
0.9575
0.9073
0.8896
0.8732
0.7748
0.7768
0.7726
0.8665
0.8918
0.8173
0.7999
0.9016
0.9204
0.8254
0.8085
0.8083
0.7711
0.771
0.8841
0.7712
0.7459
0.9209
0.8956
0.6665
0.9351

-0.0026
-0.0025
-0.002
-0.0052
-0.0018
-0.0091
-0.0038
-0.0021
-0.0014
-0.0014
-0.0023
-0.0023
-0.002
-0.0017
-0.0023
-0.0024
-0.0024
-0.0025
-0.0037
-0.0031
-0.0036
-0.003
-0.004
-0.0027
-0.0016
-0.0061
-0.0021
-0.0014
-0.0043
-0.0038
-0.0035
-0.0058
-0.0047
-0.003
-0.003
-0.0082
-0.0071
-0.0023
-0.0033
-0.0028
-0.0041
-0.0042
-0.0044
-0.0085
-0.0052
-0.0037
-0.0016
-0.0085
-0.0057
-0.0028
-0.0044
-0.0044
-0.0048
-0.0048
-0.0036
-0.0023
-0.0049
-0.0041
-0.0021
-0.0076
-0.0048

TheShack

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

28

