Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of
Guideline No. 4
J. Berenike Herrmann
09.17.19
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.057
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: J. Berenike Herrmann, “Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of Guideline
No. 4,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. December 3, 2019. doi: 10.22148/16.057
Reviewer’s note
In the following I briefly detail my comments on the submitted guidelines for the
annotation of narrative levels in the “SANTA 4 Annotation Guidelines”.
The submission documents a comprehensive and thorough approach to annotating narrative levels, going for a theory-driven perspective. The guidelines themselves are well thought through. However, they should be more transparent with
regard to theoretical premises and terminology, as well as more practically applicable through (1) more examples and (2) possibly an integration of the sections
“premises” and “annotation guidelines.” The link to computational application
should receive more explicit attention.
Formal remarks: It is advisable, where possible, to use “international references”
(published in/translated to English). Also, to use a gender-neutral language
(e.g., establishing coreference to “narrator” not just by “he”). The text should
be slightly revised for style and English idiomaticity. I would like to encourage
the authors to be less tentative in their formulations. The shared task is not the
place for discursively exploring complexity but for solving problems through
straightforward guidelines - taking a positively reductive approach.
[I have provided more detailed remarks in the submitted guidelines for the authors’ convenience].
1

J. Berenike Herrmann

Cultural Analytics

Theoretical Introduction
Within the context of the interdisciplinary scope of the shared task, the conceptualization should strike a better balance between brevity and a broader, but clearly
delineated scope. Therefore, within the limits of an annotation manual, the authors should briefly situate and elucidate the particular concepts within the larger
field (thus not limited to Genette only; and within an international frame). The
terminology should be more precise, and more transparent trough examples.
Through this, the reader will get a first working knowledge and the particular
approach taken will be motivated (“narrative”, “narrator”, and “narrative level”).

Terminology & Concepts
The authors should flag out more precisely which theory they refer to (not tacitly
assuming expert knowledge of reader). So far, formulations such as “we use the
terms first-, second-, third-, … degree narrative as an alternative terminology”
leave open which specific theoretical frame is referred to.
Experiencing space
The authors propose the useful term “experiencing space”. However, its definition “subsumes features of the narrative level with regard to its time, its space
and its characters” (p. 6) is relatively vague. It should be further specified and accompanied by annotation criteria and one or more examples. Subsequently, in
the part “premises” (p. 7: 4a-d) “experiencing space” appears as a good heuristic
concept for annotation. It should be systematically applied in the procedure, but
so far is not mentioned in 4b.

Premises
The authors should define more precisely their “search” (“We search for all narrative levels in a given narrative text.” p. 6). By close reading on a word-by-word
basis? By more loosely skimming the text? Are annotators allowed to use external references in this search, and if so, which (e.g., lexica—or Wikipedia etc.)?
The operational definition of story is “a self-contained action whose events and
happenings are causally linked and cause a change of state.” (p. 7 ) Is a “story”
really reducible to an “action” in your definition? What is the difference between
“events” and “happenings”? As for “change of state” whose state does this refer
to? The authors don’t mention actors, objects, etc.
The definition of story/level is given in 4d (p. 7). I suggest to provide it earlier, possibly together with that of the concept “experiencing space”. This would
2

Cultural Analytics

Review of Guideline No. 4

solve the problem the reader confronts in 4c: without 4d, 4b leaves open how
the authors distinguish narrating self and experiencing self practically. Also, 4c
remains unclear as to whether “a new story” (new narrator/same narrator) is identical with “a new narrative level” - and thus whether a change of narrative levels
needs a new narrator.)
Where addressing “embedding,” the authors may want to define the particular
(spatial) model of levels—do they use Genette, “working up,” or others that work
“down”? (the authors say ”Embedded stories can be functionally related to their
superordinate narrative level, their frame stories. Possible functions are 1 )” (p. 8).
Generally, the model should be maximally precise - are “interlaced” ( p. 9) and
“sequential” two types of “embedding”?

Guidelines
For annotation of “non-narrative parts”, the tag E for “exegesis” may sometimes
not be adequate (as the authors have pointed out themselves). Non-narrative
passages do not necessarily have to be linked to the exegesis. The “teller level”
may be named “level 0”, for conceptual, but also for practical reasons.

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

1 Cf. Silke Lahn and Jan Christoph Meister, Einführung in die Erzähltextanalyse (Stuttgart und
Weimar: J. B. Metzler, 2008), 83-84.

3

