Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of
Guideline No. 1.
Meredith A. Martin
10.22.19
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.053
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Meredith A. Martin, “Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of Guideline No. 1,”
Journal of Cultural Analytics. November 20, 2019. doi: 10.22148/16.053
I am reviewing the Narrative Boundaries Annotation Guide, I had several concerns.
First, the authors are clear and concise when describing the project purpose:
of training and testing a computer’s ability to identify the beginnings and endings of narratives (which the authors call narrative boundaries). They are also
clear and concise when describing what they mean by annotation in this project:
“the record of human judgments identifying where a narrative begins and ends.”
When the authors arrive at the definition of narrative, however, their clarity and
concision begin to unravel a bit. Since there are several theories of narrative, I suggest that the authors include some language like “for the purposes of this study”
before launching into their definitions, which are necessarily oversimplified.
In the last paragraph of page two, the three forms could be elaborated more helpfully. Contiguous (or, later, un-interrupted), embedded, or interrupted narratives become important later on, so the guide could highlight that importance
by bulleting the forms of narrative it deems important, and foreshadowing how
deeply and how intricately the authors will attempt to distinguish between embedded or interrupted.
2.1 should be “Uninterrupted Narrative.” I suggest they begin with “the simplest
kind of narrative is an uninterrupted one. The section 1.2, titled”narrative boundaries,” should end with “after the last word in the narration” and then continue
1

Meredith A. Martin

Cultural Analytics

with “The next three sections” etc. (I have marked this change in the document
using track change).
Embedded narratives were clearly explained and seems like a feasible for annotators, though arduous.
Marking boundaries for interrupted flashbacks and flashforwards seemed incredibly complicated. Interruptive narratives are the most complicated, and it seems
that “Time Shifts” need their own heading (3) since they are not the three main
kinds of narrative but may contain the three main kinds within them.
The example from 2.4 is too lengthy; I suggest adding a shorter example.
What happens if there are two types of narration happening (a flashback inside
a dream)? Would the phrase “like I had done every morning since she left” be a
flashback? The charts are useful but without multiple colors (and with only the
example of Murakami to go on) I think that there is, at least as the guidelines
are currently presented, quite a bit of room for interpretation and error. The
human annotators would need to be a very large group, indeed, with a high level
of fluency. For this to be a useful exercise, I can only imagine that the study would
need hundreds of annotators.
Television scripts might be moved to an entirely different guideline - I feel that
this guideline is already too complicated. I would eliminate scripts OR other
kinds of narrative, but having both is too much.
Each section would benefit from additional examples drawn from authors
other than Murakami. The beach / pirate example could be useful in each
section, and since the levels of narratives accumulate, keeping the beach / pirate
example active throughout and adding a literary text example alongside the
beach / pirate would be a welcome addition and would more easily train the
annotators. Or perhaps using a simpler narrative? Though the guidelines are
helpful I would feel baffled by multiple levels of narration. I also can’t imagine
taking on this annotation task voluntarily.
The procedures seem complicated. How many short stories will the annotator
receive? What does it mean to say “Each narrative has an ID number”? This
makes no sense to me. I also don’t understand “narrative name.” Examples here,
again from the pirate / beach story or a simpler story than IQ84, would be helpful.
“If possible, please use different colors for each narrative”? I think the authors
should assign colors. The authors could use a more robust bibliography for narrative theory.
2

Cultural Analytics

Review of Guideline No. 1.

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

3

