Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of
Guideline No. 2
Tilmann Köppe
09.13.19
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.054
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Tillman Köppe, “Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of Guideline No. 2,”
Journal of Cultural Analytics. November 4, 2019. doi: 10.22148/16.054

In this brief review, I will assess the theoretical soundness of the categories as
explained in the “SANTA 2 Annotation Guidelines” as well as the practical implementation of the theory through exemplary annotation choices.
All in all, the explanations of the categories reflect what can be found in many
introductory textbooks to narratology. This is what is to be expected, of course,
since the Annotation Guidelines do not provide the space for an extended, and
critical, discussion of the more recent state of research. I shall therefore confine
myself to commenting on where I think that the clarity and/or consistency of
the explanations can be improved, and on whether the examples provided are
controversial. My comments concern (1) analepsis and prolepsis, (2) stream of
consciousness, (3) free indirect discourse, and (4) level respectively.

Analepsis and prolepsis
In the example passage from To the Lighthouse, the following sentences are not
treated as part of the analepsis: “That meant he was going to catch crabs and
things. That meant he would climb out on to a rock; he would be cut off. Or
coming back single file on one of those little paths above the cliff one of them
1

Tilmann Köppe

Cultural Analytics

might slip. He would roll and then crash. It was growing quite dark.” The reason
given for not treating these sentences as part of the analepsis is that Mrs. Ramsays “speculation […] is not a thing that we know is definitely happening,” and
therefore the sentences are taken to be “disconnected from narrative time.”
Now it is certainly true that we do not learn whether any of the things Mrs. Ramsay speculates about are actually happening in the story. But it seems to me that
Mrs. Ramsay’s speculation about these things can be part of the analepsis. That is,
she not merely ‘summons’ how the group looked when they left, but also what she
thought at the moment when they left. In this case, the sentences quoted may be
considered part of “narrative time” and hence part of the analepsis.—Note that
we do not have reason to doubt that Mrs. Ramsay speculates about these things.
So treating the passage as part of the analepsis is consistent with the criterion
explicitly given: the speculation is something that “we know is definitely happening”. What we do not know, however, is the point in time when the speculation
takes place; there are two possible interpretations both of which are consistent
with the text. I’d therefore suggest using a clearer example, i.e. one that does not
allow for two viable interpretations (only one of which is consistent with the proposed tagging of the example passage).

Stream of consciousness
In the introductory paragraph the stream of consciousness is explained as follows: it “is meant to come directly from the character’s mind, without authorial
intervention or translation into something more grammatical or contextuallyinformed”. The example however, clearly shows several marks of “authorial intervention”. Among these are the use of third person pronouns (“she”) and past
tense. But Miriam neither thinks about herself using the third person nor using
past tense, presumably. Moreover, in the passage that introduces the example, it
is suggested that what is decisive about stream of consciousness is that what is said
is neither “objective” nor “observable by anyone else”. These are criteria different
from the ones introduced above (“without authorial intervention or translation
into something more grammatical or contextually-informed”), and one wonders
which of those is actually decisive or, in any case, how these different criteria relate to each other. It seems to me that the passage quoted from Pointed Roofs is
indeed such that it is about something that is not observable by anyone but the
character herself; but it does show several marks of authorial intervention. Actually, this passage is an instance of free indirect discourse rather than stream of
consciousness.
2

Cultural Analytics

Annotating Narrative Levels

Free indirect discourse
Stream of consciousness is distinguished from free indirect discourse by claiming
that the latter “is coloured by the perceptions of a character, not to the radical
extent of stream-of-consciousness, but in a more subtle way”. It will be hard to
judge whether the subjective “colouring” of a passage is “subtle” enough in order
to distinguish it from stream of consciousness. The criterion could work only
if one were able to compare two passages, such that one could be able to judge
the relative ‘subjectivity’ of them. In standard cases, however, we do not have
two passages for comparison. Moreover, the passage from Tender is the Night is
introduced as containing “evaluations”, but I can’t find any in there.

Level
The passage quoted from To the Lighthouse contains the phrase “that hedge which
had over and over again rounded some pause, signified some conclusion, seeing
his wife and child, seeing again the urns with the trailing of red geraniums which
had so often decorated processes of thought, and bore, written up among their
leaves, as if they were scraps of paper on which one scribbles notes in the rush
of reading”. Given that “seeing” is a factive verb (in the sense that ‘seeing that p’
implies the truth of p), this strikes me as an analepsis too.
One final note: I think that it might be useful to distinguish clearly between the
definition of a narratological term (such as stream of consciousness) on the one
hand and the criteria which help us to decide whether the phenomenon in question is instantiated in a given narrative. The definition of a term captures the
nature of the phenomenon or, to put it differently, its constitutive features. Criteria for the application of a term, in contrast, are mere guides to its application.
Accordingly, if a constitutive feature of some narrative phenomenon is missing
from some passage, we know that the passage does not feature that phenomenon.
But if some criterion for the application of a term is not satisfied, that does not
mean that the term cannot apply. (Criteria, in other words, need not have the
status of necessary conditions.) To give but one example, the grammatical correctness of a passage may be a criterion for stream of consciousness such that the
grammatical correctness of a passage counts against its being in this narrative
mode. (In other words, it may be unlikely that a passage is both grammatically
correct and in the stream of consciousness mode.) But the grammatical incorrectness is not a constitutive feature of stream of consciousness. It is certainly
3

Tilmann Köppe

Cultural Analytics

possible that a grammatically correct passage features this very narrative mode.

4

