Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of
Guideline No. 5
Jan Horstmann
08.29.19
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.058
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Jan Horstmann, “Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of Guideline No.
5,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. December 3, 2019. doi: 10.22148/16.058
The guideline is based on a clear and plausible distinction between narrative levels
and narrative acts. Narrative levels make up the vertical axis of the developed
tagset, on which there can be n narrative acts on each of its levels. The narrative
acts in turn form the horizontal axes of the tagset. The amount of narrative acts
(n) on each level (which can be embedded, framed, juxtaposed) is principally
unlimited. This general distinction takes into account the fact that a change of
speaker/narrator can take place without the changing of narrative level, i.e., can
happen in the same diegesis.
The m ain t heoretical f oundations o f t he p roposed t agset a re G érard Genette’s
works on narrative levels (1983: Narrative discourse: An essay in method and
1988: Narrative Discourse Revisited) and Marie-Laure Ryan’s framework for the
actual and/or virtual forms of crossing narrative boundaries (i.e. illocutionary or
ontological) as proposed in Possible worlds, artificial intelligence, and narrative
theory (1991). Both contributions stem from classical narratology (Ryan’s with a
more transmedial angle to it than Genette’s) and are well-established in the field.
Despite their respective complexity, the guideline aptly explains the theories, and
- more importantly - takes them as they are without criticizing them for aspects
that could be seen as inconsistent or unintuitive (for example the fact that a first
level narrator for Genette is “extradiegetic by definition”); a pragmatic decision
which clearly puts the focus of the guideline on the operationalization of narrative levels as discussed in theory rather than letting it become a contribution to
1

Jan Horstman

Cultural Analytics

these theoretical discussions.
A point that could be stated more clearly is that the guideline decidedly tries to
operationalize only selected parts of the discussed theories and e.g. does not consider every crossing of an illocutionary boundary as outlined by Ryan as a case in
which “indeed a new narrative act is realized” (p. 3). At the bottom of this specific
choice there seems to be a differentiation between speakers and narrators. The
underlying understanding of narrativity, however, unfortunately remains rather
unspecified.
A very useful differentiation is established with regards to narrative acts: the
guideline considers embedded and framed narratives to both be cases of several
narrative acts alternating in different ways. Whereas embedded narratives are
considered to be shorter narratives within a larger story, framed narratives are
described as a longer story that is framed by a short narrative (which e.g. narrates
the situation of the telling). Since there does not always have to be a definite border between inner and frame narratives, the comprehensible aim of the proposed
tagset is not to identify techniques or functions of embedding or framing.
A further positive aspect of this guideline are the cross-categorial properties that
allow the annotators to justify their decisions during the annotation process and
to exemplify possible relations between narrative levels and narrative acts (i.e. the
specific way of boundary crossing, the respective narrative act of the former level,
the speakers’ - or narrators’? - identities, types of narrative-like direct speech acts,
quotations of a literary work, letters etc., metanarration and metafiction as well as
metalepsis). Genette’s differentiation between homo- and heterodiegetic narrators occurs as properties as well; the difficulties that these supposedly binary categories can bring (or even the different understandings that exist within academic
discussions), however, are not reflected upon and thus these two properties could
lead to irregularities in the annotation process and lower inter-annotator agreement.
The intelligible, theory-based guideline frequently operates with examples from
literary texts, which makes it much easier to capture the explained categories and
in return enhances the usability of the proposed tagset. The properties in practice should help to tell whether the annotation of narrative acts helps to identify
narrative levels or not, and how the manifold relations between acts and levels
can be used to operationalize the detection of narrative levels.

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
2

Cultural Analytics

Annotating Narrative Levels

Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

3

