Blankenship, Avery. “What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary,
Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in Nineteenth-Century Newspaper
Recipes.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 1, Apr. 2024,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.115371.

ARTICLE

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary,
Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in NineteenthCentury Newspaper Recipes
Avery Blankenship1
1 Northeastern University

Keywords: machine learning, word embedding models, nineteenth-century newspapers, nineteenth-century recipes, nineteenth-century america, nineteenthcentury literature and culture
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.115371

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 1, 2024

In this article, I use document embedding models and a training set of
nineteenth-century American recipes to build a pipeline classifier for identifying
recipes in the broader nineteenth-century newspaper press. The model reveals a
much more expansive understanding of the recipe form, which primarily
centers around measurement words and prescriptive language rather than a
heavily reliance upon the culinary. This fluidity of form allows nineteenthcentury writers to harness the recipe form as a tool for political commentary all
while no appearing to disrupt the careful divides between the public and
domestic spheres. These recipe-adjacent texts, which are both recipe and not,
offer a broader picture of short-form political commentary in the nineteenth
century which can include genres and forms once thought unable to gestured
beyond the confines of the kitchen.

Introduction
“Take three gallons of confidence; one peck of international agreement; one
quart of gold standard; seven table spoonfuls of prosperity; two quarts,
of sound money, and one pound of protection,” instructs a recipe for
“Confidence Pudding” from the March 13, 1897 edition of The Dawn
submitted to the paper by a self-identified, unemployed mechanic, “Boil it
with twelve months of no work for an hour and eat it while hot.” Not quite
a recipe, but not-not a recipe, this strange text triggers many questions, most
pressing of which is: What is this doing in the newspaper? Simultaneously
funny and commiserative, this not-quite-recipe takes a form that is instantly
familiar—folkish, instructive, and vernacular in that way that recipes so often
are, though food is hardly the focus. In the absence of actual culinary
instruction, can we even call this recipe? If it isn’t a recipe, then what else
could it be? Whatever it may be, there is something useful to the writer about
the recipe form. There is something about the recipe that the writer felt was a

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

provocative and effective form through which to comment on the state of the
1
nation and its particular impact on working-class citizens in 1897. Recipes,
this newspaper-writer implies, are uniquely useful political tools.
While the writer could have chosen to formulate this piece as an essay or
even narrative, the use of the recipe form allows the writer to both joke
with the reader and offer social commentary in a vernacular and commiserate
way, all while adopting a form that perhaps a foreman or a business person
might have written off and overlooked while reading the paper. The form
allows the writer to speak to readers in the language of the everyday, the
non-threatening, the domestic. Through this invocation of the recipe form,
the mechanic’s political viewpoint is presented to the reader in a way that is
inoffensive—easy to chew and swallow down. For contemporary readers, the
recipe for “Confidence Pudding” reveals two things. One, that nineteenthcentury people considered the recipe form to be quite flexible and not
2
confined to the purely culinary or domestic. Second, that the dual tone that
recipes can so easily take on allows writers to trouble the status-quo while not
appearing to do so: to comment on politics and social issues from the safety
of a form that some readers may have skimmed over altogether at first glance.
While the study of commercial cookbooks and manuscript recipes has
increased dramatically in the last decade, nineteenth-century newspapers have
always presented a problem to scholars of nineteenth-century domestic print
culture. Although we know that newspapers often published domestic
writing, these pieces are often only a single paragraph or even just a few lines
in length. When faced with the massive quantity of text that may appear
on any given nineteenth-century newspaper page, locating a single paragraph
or two of interest is akin to finding a needle in a haystack. In many ways,
working with nineteenth-century newspapers requires that you already know
what you are looking for in the paper when the articles often don’t include
titles, section headings, or other forms of delineation. Ultimately, the result
of this foreknowledge is that there is a world of text—stories, narratives, and
lives—that we pass over without even knowing.
My purpose in this article is twofold. First, I introduce a workflow designed
to tackle that haystack of newspaper text by designing a needle-detecting
pipeline of nineteenth-century newspapers. This workflow uses word

1 In 1897, the United States was in the midst of the Spanish-American war. During this time, the United States embraced the gold standard

and increased involvement in international politics. The writer appears to be offering commentary on the nation’s politics and also
commenting on the impact these politics have on working-class people–namely unemployment.
2 Other scholars have argued for the flexibility of the recipe form and its usefulness across generations of a family. For example, Elaine Leong

writes in “Collecting Knowledge for the Family: Recipes, Gender and Practical Knowledge in the Early Modern English Household.”
Centaurus, vol. 55, no. 2, 2013, pp. 81–103. Wiley Online Library, https://doi.org/10.1111/1600-0498.12019 that recipes and recipe books
in early modern europe reflect the needs and interests of particular families. Similarly, Madeline Shanahan writes in Manuscript Recipe Books
as Archaeological Objects: Text and Food in the Early Modern World. Lexington Books, 2014 that manuscript recipes represent generational
knowledge and familial practices in domesticity. My intervention here is to focus on the usefulness of the recipe form beyond the
household—and in particular its usefulness to nineteenth-century people who otherwise might not have considered the recipe a particularly
meaningful genre for political commentary if not for the flexibility of its form.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Recipe for Confidence Pudding from the March 13, 1897 edition of The Dawn

embedding models and document vectors to automate the process of
identifying recipes in newspaper data by turning the task into a classification
problem. Using this model, I am able to identify texts with shared semantic
relationships which can lead to grouping them with texts I already know
are recipes. Second, because word and document vectors prioritize semantic
relationships, the model allows me to explore the fluid space between recipes
and not-recipes based on similarities in contextual use. I analyze how
instances of these not-quite-recipes, what I call “recipe-adjacent” texts, in
the nineteenth-century newspaper demonstrate both the flexibility of the
recipe form and its ability to offer social commentary in ways that do not
immediately appear to trouble the status-quo. Recipe-adjacent texts offer an
invocation of the recipe form that is intimately intertwined with the context
of the newspaper. Formally printed and published cookbooks showcase the
author or editor’s idea of what cooking is or should be, and thus any political
commentary is to be understood within this context. The recipe-adjacent text,
however, exists within the broader context of the newspaper, placing it in
conversation with both the culinary and political texts that surround it, with
the rapid fire speed with which the newspaper is published in the period,
and most importantly with newspaper readers. This article thus argues for a
reshaping of what recipes are and for what reasons they are written as well as
a broader consideration of the political possibilities of the recipe form.

Domestic Genres
The question of genre and form is one that complicates the study of
nineteenth-century domestic writing and recipes in particular. While recipes
today may typically follow a more formulaic structure, recipes in the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

nineteenth century could take many forms (lists, prose, poetry, pedagogy,
etc.) and appear just about anywhere: in diaries, pamphlets, magazines,
newspapers, books, scrapbooks, and even stray bits of paper. Zboray and
Zboray (2009) write that the fluidity of genre in the nineteenth-century
domestic sphere offers “a glimpse into the structural relationship between
writing as a practice and lived experience” (103). Nineteenth-century
newspaper writers and readers often push at the boundary lines between
genres and forms, and in some ways, the obscurity of genre and form was
3
part of the appeal of the newspaper. The ways in which domestic writers
in the nineteenth century transgress the boundaries between genre and form
emphasize the particularities of nineteenth-century domestic writing, and
recipes in particular, which often straddle the line between formalism and
folklore.
However, while generic and formal fluidity is a common feature of
nineteenth-century newspaper recipes, these very same writerly transgressions
can make locating them in libraries and archives complicated. Printed books
were often repurposed as repositories for recipes clipped from newspapers,
4
which were pasted over the original text. When these texts then appear
in institutional collections, the likelihood that they will be categorized as
“recipe books” is understandably low. In some cases, the newspaper clippings
may have even been removed at some point to reveal the text underneath
(Figure 1). As a result, while commercial, printed cookbooks are relatively
straightforward to locate—if they have been preserved—other forms of texts
that were utilized as cookbooks or were modified by their users remain much
more difficult to pinpoint.
In many ways, the slipperiness of domestic genres defies scholarly taxonomies.
When domestic writing appears embedded within the hybrid framework
of the nineteenth-century newspaper, even simple categorization becomes a
perplexing task. Diedre Lynch argues that studying handmade domestic texts
such as albums or scrapbooks shifts our attention away from what these texts
are and towards how they work or how they connect readers and writers
to one another (91-93). However, categorization is crucial to the study of
historical texts. Categorizing texts allows them to be searchable, retrievable,
and thus studyable. However, as I mentioned, part of the difficulty of
working with ephemeral recipes in newspapers, is how scattered they are
across both the newspaper as well as in other places such as diaries or
scrapbooks. “There is no way of ever getting access to the past,” Geoffrey
Bowker and Susan Star write in Sorting Things Out (2000), “except through

3 See Roggenkamp, Karen. Narrating the News: New Journalism and Literary Genre in Late Nineteenth-Century American Newspapers and

Fiction. The Kent State University Press, 2005. Roggenkamp argues that the lines between factual reporting and fictional storytelling were
often obscured in the newspaper. Distinguishing between was was real and imaginary was part of the appeal of penny papers, in particular
(3-5).
4 See Writing with Scissors: American Scrapbooks from the Civil War to the Harlem Renaissance (2012) by Ellen Gruber Garvey

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Figure 1. This copy of The Ladies’ New Book of Cookery (1852) by Sarah Hale previously had newspaper recipes
pasted over the title page, but these clippings were later ripped off of the page, possibly in an attempt to restore the
original text. This copy is currently held by the American Antiquarian Society.

classification systems of one sort of another—formal or informal, hierarchical
or not” (41). Shifting the focus of the study of newspaper recipes to how they
work is important, but in order to do so, we must first locate them at all and
expand the methods that we use to do so.
In Data Feminism (2020), Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren Klein emphasize
that “what gets counted counts.” The decision to include or exclude an item
from a data set is in itself a form of categorization—one that asserts that that
item does or does not belong. Similarly, Digital Curator for the Smithsonian
National Museum of African American History and Culture, Dorothy Berry,
writes that what gets included in archives and libraries is what becomes the
5
truth. Although the newspaper recipes are there in the sense that they are
intermixed with the millions of other pages of newspapers in collections such
as Chronicling America, it is precisely their intermixedness which renders
them as a brief hiccup of a presence to scholars.
Studying recipes in the nineteenth-century newspaper is also complicated by
the fact that, despite how commonly they appear in various issues across the
country, their position and style on the pages of newspapers is rarely fixed.
Nineteenth-century newspapers differ significantly from how newspapers
in the twenty-first century look and how they are read. Without defined
column headings or, in some cases, delineation between articles, searching

5 Berry, Dorothy. “The House Archives Built.” up//root. Accessed July 14, 2022. https://www.uproot.space/features/the-house-archives-built.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

for a specific genre of writing within any particular issue of a newspaper
often requires reading through each individual page. It is also not guaranteed
that a recipe will include the word “recipe” in the text, meaning that many
relevant clippings will slip through keyword searches. Broersma and Harbers
argue that keyword searching is not even particularly useful to researchers
working with historical newspapers unless the researcher is interested in
specific dates or events (1151). With the Library of Congress’ Chronicling
America collection, in particular, the best match for a keyword search is
not guaranteed to be listed as the first result of a search, for instance,
when a keyword has multiple uses and meanings or when the selected
keyword is too vague. As Deacon (2007) notes, “key word searching is best
suited for identifying tangible ‘things’ (i.e. people, places, events and policies)
rather than ‘themes’ (i.e. more abstract, subtler and multifaceted concepts)”
(8). With recipes, this becomes somewhat tricky. For instance, the word
“receipt” used to mean “recipe,” but its usage and definition has changed
over time—though not all at once. As a result of these limitations, locating
recipes by hand in a nineteenth-century newspaper until the researcher is too
exhausted with text to continue sifting has thus far been the primary mode
of studying them.
Word and document embedding models are equipped to tackle such
problems by focusing on the classification of a type of document rather than
strictly its content. Johanna Drucker describes distant reading methods as
“ways of viewing the cultural record that are as useful as seeing the earth from
6
space” (630). The classification of genre, in particular, has been significantly
7
addressed through the application of these methodologies. Statistical
modeling has shown to be a useful tool for classifying genre in a body of
text. In Distant Horizons (2019), Ted Underwood advocates for the use of
statistical modeling for genre detection, writing that “statistical models can
embrace the contextual and perspectival character of historical interpretation,
while giving scholars more control over the contexts and perspectives they
provisionally adopt” (37). Underwood emphasizes, however, that genre can
be a slippery concept—it means different things to different people, readers
and scholars alike. While this indicates that no statistical model will ever
be able to fully capture the entirety of a particular genre, their ability
to emphasize context and semantic relationships makes the application of
statistical modeling and machine learning methodologies to the identification
of fluid genres like the recipe particularly useful.

6 See, for example, “A Matter of Scale” by Matthew Jockers and Julia Flanders, “The Literary, the Humanistic, the Digital” by Julia Flanders,

and “Text: A Massively Addressable Object” by Michael Witmore.
7 See, for example, Sarah Allison, et al. “Quantitative Formalism: An Experiment.” Stanford Literary Lab, 2011. and Schöch, Christof. “Topic

Modeling Genre: An Exploration of French Classical and Enlightenment Drama.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 011, no. 2, May 2017.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Laura Nelson argues that machine learning, in particular, provides an
“inductive framework” through which to analyze complex categories in an
intersectional way. Machine learning’s potential is realized when combined
with inductive research—when the researcher and the model work together
to inform one another. For example, D’Ignazio and Klein argue that while
categorization is an inevitable part of working with data, in instances where
data complicates or pushes at the boundaries of systems of classification it is
important to apply feminist frameworks in order to question the very systems
of classification in the first place. This process of questioning requires that
the researcher reflect not just on the model’s accuracy, but how that model’s
categorization decisions reflect a broader framework of classification that may
at times not be particularly useful.
Rather than view instances where the model is not behaving in an expected
way as failures, through the application of ideas that Nelson, D’Ignazio and
Klein present, these supposed “failures” can present useful opportunities for
the researcher to reflect on their own systems of categorization and whether
or not these systems are particularly suited to a corpus. For example, for this
article, I trained a machine learning model using recipes from professionally
published nineteenth-century cookbooks. When that model then makes a
mistake in classifying a recipe—such as passing over what a human would
consider to be a recipe or including texts that we would not typically
consider to be recipes—those mistakes don’t necessarily reflect a flaw in the
model. Rather, those mistakes offer a lens through which to reevaluate how
we understand the genre of recipe, which is often mistakenly understood
as a siloed genre, or that a book-recipe and a newspaper-recipe are the
same thing. Long and So (2016) write that “there is more to be gained by
explicating the singular aspects of a text, or by describing how it deviates
from an assumed normative model, rather than by trying to define the
model itself” (241). Similarly, I take misclassifications—or what I would have
once perceived as misclassifications—as opportunities to enrich my work
rather than deter it. Long and So also write that the act of categorizing
literary texts in itself “also fundamentally determines the outcome of analysis
and requires that a set of internally diverse texts be ostensibly pigeonholed
into a limited number of categories” (252). They go on to argue, however,
that this practice can open up the analysis to consider the boundaries of
the categories assigned to a text, and whether or not those boundaries are
usefully recognized by a machine. Conversations about digital humanities
methods tend to unequally privilege technical disciplines such as statistics
and computer science as granting legitimacy to literary or humanistic
scholars—robustness of method, more “correct” numbers, proper
8
implementation. This view of digital humanities work limits the possibilities

8 See for example Da, Nan Z. “The Computational Case against Computational Literary Studies.” Critical Inquiry, vol. 45, no. 3, Mar. 2019,

pp. 601–39. www-journals-uchicago-edu.ezproxy.neu.edu (Atypon), https://doi.org/10.1086/702594.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

that technical disciplines may have to be shaped by work in literary studies,
instead. Namely, that robustness of method is not always the goal as much
as trying to make sense of a complicated, and often contradictory, literary
landscape which often defies rules and struggles against categorization.
Recently, digital humanist Gabi Kirilloff has argued that rather than focusing
on computation and methods as a deliverable, that digital humanists should
9
instead view computation as a type of context building like archival work.
The field’s preoccupation with methodological validity and innovation can
at times stand in the way of innovative interpretation. Kirilloff argues that
even incorrect data or flawed methods can lead to insightful interpretation.
I would add that the pressure to be an inventor in digital humanities—to
both invent methods and to invent new readings—distances researchers from
one another and places us in the very academic silos that Nelson argues
underutilize the full potential of computational methods. Thus, the purpose
of the methodological and analytical decisions I outline in this article is less
to invent a new, or even entirely valid, way of classifying recipes and instead
to think about why classifying recipes is so difficult to begin with and how
these difficulties can surface unique features of recipes that may otherwise
go overlooked. In this article, I consider my machine learning model to be
less of a tool which can itself be classified as either effective or ineffective
and more a type of perspective. When the model misclassifies recipes, those
misclassifications can be used to, instead of criticizing the model, turn that
criticism inward in order to ask myself why I believe those misclassifications
were made in error. In this way, I use misclassifications not to tinker with the
model until it reads recipes the same way I do, but to instead reconfigure my
own understanding of what a recipe is.

Methodology
The Digitized Newspaper
Before scholars can conduct a computational analysis of a newspaper, the
newspaper must undergo various transformations to shift it from analog to
digital form. Because I approach my work from an ethics of transparency,
I believe that it is essential to not only unpack the effect that this
transformation has on the data, but also its impact on our understanding of
the nineteenth-century newspaper. As Lauren Klein powerfully writes:

9 See Gabi, Kirilloff. “Computation as Context: New Approaches to the Close/Distant Reading Debate.” College Literature, vol. 49, no. 1,

2022, pp. 1–25. Project MUSE, https://doi.org/10.1353/lit.2022.0000.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Among the greatest contributions of the digital humanities is
its ability to illuminate the position of the critic with respect to
his or her archive of study, and to call attention to the ethical
and affective as well as epistemological implications of his or her
methodological choices. (672)
As an essential first step to outlining my methodology, I will acknowledge
some of the perspectival limitations inherent in working with nineteenthcentury newspapers as digital objects.
Algee-Hewitt et al. describe a corpus as “smaller than the archive, which
is smaller than the published: like three Russian dolls, fitting neatly into
one another” (2). Nineteenth-century newspapers are key examples of this
analogy: published newspaper articles are like an ocean and digital collections
such as Chronicling America constitute only a cove within that ocean.
Decisions regarding which newspapers should be preserved and whether
they will be digitized are impacted by many factors, including funding,
equipment availability, staff, and the quality of the paper itself. As Lyneise
Williams discusses, not only should texts be understood as mediators, but the
technology used to preserve and access those texts should also be approached
10
as a representational tool. For newspapers, this means that both the
newspaper and its digitized form are social mediators that prevent us from
accessing nineteenth-century society directly.
Digital archives, Katherine Bode argues, “are interpretive constructs,” (83)
and “neither the analog record nor the digital one offers an unmediated
and comprehensive view of the literary-historical record; both are partial,
and not necessarily in complementary ways” (96). An understanding of
these varying degrees of scale and mediation are essential to the study of
nineteenth-century newspapers, allowing researchers to shift analysis away
from totalizing statements about nineteenth-century society and towards
analytic precision. Any conclusions one can draw about a body of newspapers
are in actuality conclusions about a particular body of newspapers preserved
by an institution and represented digitally. Ryan Cordell argues that the
digital instantiation of an analog textual object constitutes an entirely new
11
object and should be treated as such. Digital representations of historical
texts must be approached as archival objects in their own right, which means
that they come with the same limitations and impacts of decision-making that
physical archival objects do. While digital scans may increase access to archival
material, that access is not even or without its own set of politics.

10 See Williams, Lyneise. “What Computational Archival Science Can Learn from Art History and Material Culture Studies.” 2019 IEEE

International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), 2019, pp. 3153–55. IEEE Xplore, https://doi.org/10.1109/BigData47090.2019.9006527.
11 See Cordell, Ryan. “‘Q i-Jtb the Raven’: Taking Dirty OCR Seriously.” Book History, vol. 20, no. 1, 2017, pp. 188–225. Project MUSE,

https://doi.org/10.1353/bh.2017.0006.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Benjamin Fagan points out that the absence of many Black newspapers in
open-access databases, as well as Chronicling America’s limited representation
of the Black press, means that conclusions drawn from the study of
Chronicling America’s collection of digitized newspapers apply very
12
specifically to white newspapers and only those that have been preserved.
13
Because my newspaper data is sourced from the Viral Texts project database,
which sources many of its newspapers from Chronicling America and Gale
Historical Newspapers, any conclusions I can draw about recipes in
newspapers are similarly impacted. However, while the glimpse of domestic
writing offered by Chronicling America may reflect a very white, American
perspective, the collection does include many regional papers, which makes
studying middle- and working-class domestic writing much more fruitful.
While larger papers in cities included recipes sparingly, regional newspapers
are much more likely to include recipes and other forms of domestic writing
with regular publication. The collection shifts the attention away from being
centered on urban life and towards the day-to-day which is best captured in
rural papers. This perspective is especially important to the study of recipes
given their often vernacular or folkish nature.
Acknowledging the many ways in which the data I work with has already
been mediated before I have encountered it is an essential move in feminist
14
data practice as D’Ignazio and Klein outline. This mediation shifts the
conclusions that I can draw from my analysis towards more precision. For
instance, while I may be able to analyze the recipes present in the newspapers
available through Chronicling America, there are millions of newspaper pages
that are not part of that collection. The absences of these data are particularly
pertinent to the study of domestic writing, which has historically itself been
limited by gaps in available records.

Messy OCR and its Impact on Classification
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is a technology designed to
automatically recognize text and transcribe digitized textual objects to make
them searchable. Though OCR is commonly used in newspaper databases
to improve discoverability, newspapers present a number of challenges to
automatically detecting text. As Smith et al. point out, OCR makes frequent
mistakes when applied to historical newspapers due to the difficulty of
15
navigating around damaged or worn pages. Strange et al. further note that

12 Fagan, Benjamin. “Chronicling White America.” American Periodicals: A Journal of History & Criticism, vol. 26, no. 1, 2016, pp. 10–13.
13 See Smith, David A., et al. “Computational Methods for Uncovering Reprinted Texts in Antebellum Newspapers.” American Literary

History, vol. 27, no. 3, Sept. 2015, pp. E1–15. Silverchair, https://doi.org/10.1093/alh/ajv029. And Ryan Cordell and David Smith, Viral
Texts: Mapping Networks of Reprinting in 19th-Century Newspapers and Magazines (2022), http://viraltexts.org.
14 See D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren F. Klein. Data Feminism. MIT Press, 2020.
15 See Smith, David A., et al. “Computational Methods for Uncovering Reprinted Texts in Antebellum Newspapers.” American Literary

History, vol. 27, no. 3, Sept. 2015, pp. E1–15. Silverchair, https://doi.org/10.1093/alh/ajv029.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

small-scale, regional papers tend to produce poorer quality scans as a result
of a combination of variable historical and contemporary resources such as
low quality ink or type and a lack of access to preservation equipment. As a
result, metropolitan papers tend to be cleaner and more receptive to OCR,
16
while rural papers are likely to contain many more mistakes. These mistakes
and variations in OCR can be useful, as Cordell has argued, in examining
circulation in the nineteenth-century periodical press. However, the quality
17
of OCR can also negatively impact classification tasks. Strange et al. explain
that the degree to which OCR errors can impact text mining depends on the
task at hand, as “tasks of sentence boundary detection, tokenization, and partof-speech tagging on text are all compromised by OCR errors” (para. 17).
Furthermore, OCR errors can impact language modeling tasks, such as
topic modeling, which has been popularly used for downstream classification
18
tasks. As Mutuvi et al. note, the impact of OCR “noise” depends on the
task being performed. For example, while OCR errors have minimal impact
on certain NLP tasks, the same level of “noise” produced by OCR errors can
adversely affect methods such as topic modeling (5). This, in turn, impacts
the quality of the topics derived from the task. Since topic modeling, a
statistical method for determining the most frequent topics in a text, focuses
on addressing content rather than semantic relationships, the method was
not ideal for the purposes of determining such a slippery genre as recipes. As
the recipe for “Confidence Pudding” demonstrates, recipes in the nineteenth
century span across topics, meaning that a topic classification focused on
food as a mainstay of the genre may overlook a broad swath of recipes. The
reverse is also true: not all writing in newspapers on the topic of food or
food preparation are recipes. As a result, classification of topical genres in
the newspaper would not necessarily capture the recipe as a genre or form.
Instead, I needed a method that would successfully capture the semantics and
context of newspaper writing with as little negative impact from OCR noise
as possible.

16 See Strange, Carolyn, et al. “Mining for the Meanings of a Murder: The Impact of OCR Quality on the Use of Digitized Historical

Newspapers.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 008, no. 1, Apr. 2014.
17 See Cordell, Ryan. “‘Q i-Jtb the Raven’: Taking Dirty OCR Seriously.” Book History, vol. 20, no. 1, 2017, pp. 188–225. Project MUSE,

https://doi.org/10.1353/bh.2017.0006.
18 See for example, Walker et al., Daniel, et al. “Evaluating Models of Latent Document Semantics in the Presence of OCR Errors.” Faculty

Publications, Jan. 2010, https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/facpub/1648., Todorov, Konstantin, and Giovanni Colavizza. An Assessment of the
Impact of OCR Noise on Language Models. arXiv:2202.00470, arXiv, 26 Jan. 2022. arXiv.org, http://arxiv.org/abs/2202.00470., and Dutta,
Haimonti, Mutuvi, Stephen, et al. “Evaluating the Impact of OCR Errors on Topic Modeling.” Maturity and Innovation in Digital
Libraries, edited by Milena Dobreva et al., Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 3–14. Springer Link, https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-04257-8_1., and Aayushee Gupta. “PNRank: Unsupervised Ranking of Person Name Entities from Noisy OCR Text.” Decision
Support Systems, vol. 152, Jan. 2022, p. 113662. ScienceDirect, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2021.113662.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Word vectors have steadily grown more popular in the digital humanities.
19
20
With tutorials, theoretical breakdowns, and entire institutes dedicated to
21
word vectors and big data, there is no shortage of resources for getting
started. While word vectors, like topic models, are adversely impacted by
22
OCR errors, it is possible to obtain robust results with their usage. In
a study on the impact of OCR noise on language models, Todorov and
Colavizza found that although the impact of OCR errors on end results is
significant, this performance is not consistent across methods. For example,
transformer-based algorithms such as BERT tend to be outperformed by
‘simpler’ models, including those trained using Word2Vec. Todorov and
Colavizza further explain that Word2Vec is more resilient to OCR noise in
the presence of smaller datasets (7). Since even a large dataset of recipes is
guaranteed to have fewer words than, say, a dataset of novels, this made
Word2Vec suitable for developing my model. The handling of OCR errors
as well as the stability of the results, makes Word2Vec and word embedding
models a valuable method for classifying OCR’ed newspapers.

Word2Vec and Doc2Vec
My classifier was built by first training a Doc2Vec model on a dataset
of recipes that I individually selected from published, nineteenth-century
23
cookbooks. In 2013, Mikolov et al. et al. introduced Word2Vec, a model
24
for representing words as vectors using a neural network. Word-embedding
models represent the relationships between words in a corpus with each
word occupying a point in space some distance from related words, and
this location is represented by what is called a “vector,” or a numerical
representation of that word. As a result, word embedding models can model
the semantic relationships between words based on their closeness or distance
in a shared semantic space.
In 2015, Mikolov et al. et al. proposed a modification of Word2Vec titled
Doc2Vec, which models semantic relationships at the document level rather
25
than the word level. For example, rather than focus on individual words as

19 See Ben Schmidt’s Vector Space Models for the Digital Humanities. http://bookworm.benschmidt.org/posts/2015-10-25-Word-

Embeddings.html. Accessed 23 Apr. 2022.
20 See Ryan Heuser’s http://ryanheuser.org/word-vectors-2/. Accessed 23 Apr. 2022.
21 See the Women Writers Project’s https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/outreach/seminars/neh_wem.html
22 See Dutta, Haimonti, and Aayushee Gupta. “PNRank: Unsupervised Ranking of Person Name Entities from Noisy OCR Text.” Decision

Support Systems, vol. 152, Jan. 2022, p. 113662. ScienceDirect, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2021.113662.
23 I sourced the initial training data from cookbooks available through Project Gutenberg. I used only cookbooks published in the nineteenth-

century and in America in order to more closely match the newspaper data. The initial training set included one thousand recipes. The data
is available on GitHub. https://github.com/ViralTexts/nineteenth-century-recipes
24 See Mikolov, Tomas, et al. “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their Compositionality.” Advances in Neural

Information Processing Systems, vol. 26, Curran Associates, Inc., 2013. Neural Information Processing Systems,
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2013/hash/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Abstract.html.
25 See Le, Quoc V., and Tomas Mikolov. Distributed Representations of Sentences and Documents. arXiv:1405.4053, arXiv, 22 May 2014.

arXiv.org, http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.4053.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

their own entities, with Doc2Vec words could be linked together in sentences,
paragraphs, or several paragraphs. The model assigns vectors to individual
words in a paragraph, and then assigns the entire paragraph a vector which
allows the model to understand paragraphs as joint entities which are made
26
up of individual words. With training, the paragraph vectors can be used
for classification tasks using pre-determined labels that the researcher provides
the model. In this way, the model comes to learn what the vector of a
particular document is, its relationship to other documents in the corpus, and
its particular relationship to documents in categories with shared labels. This
method is particularly useful for the exploratory research in large corpora of
text since it maintains the unsupervised way that word embedding models
uncover the relationships between documents while allowing for the semisupervision of relating those relationships to categories of text that the
researcher has already identified.

Corpus Description and Doc2Vec Implementation
In the absence of a robust set of nineteenth-century newspaper recipes to
use as training data, I sourced my training data from commercial cookbooks
published in the nineteenth century. While the machine learning community
has increasingly become interested in analyzing recipes and developing recipe
27
datasets, these studies tend to be focused on modern recipe analysis. Though
recipes tend to be passed down from generation to generation, using modern
recipes, or anything published in the twentieth century, to develop a machine
learning task for determining nineteenth-century recipes poses several
challenges. For example, the end of the nineteenth century marks a shift in
technologies of the kitchen. Early nineteenth-century recipes often include
instructions for both cookstoves and fireplaces, with wood still accounting
for ninety percent of the nation’s fuel in the 1850s. By the end of the
28
century, however, many more kitchens made use of coal-burning cookstoves.
Similar innovations such as the Dover Egg Beater and chemical leavening
and baking soda, as well as the widespread availability of ingredients after
the invention of the refrigerator, make recipes at the end of the century and
beyond significantly different from recipes in the mid- or early-period. There,

26 The model understands and links paragraphs by learning the vectors for each individual word in a paragraph as well as the vector for each

paragraph. The model then averages those two vectors in order to predict what the next word in context might be using the skip-gram
algorithm.
27 See for example, Jiang, Yiwei, et al. “Recipe Instruction Semantics Corpus (RISeC): Resolving Semantic Structure and Zero Anaphora in

Recipes.” Proceedings of the 1st Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 10th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 821–26. ACLWeb,
https://aclanthology.org/2020.aacl-main.82., Recipe1M+: A Dataset for Learning Cross-Modal Embeddings for Cooking Recipes and Food
Images - MIT. http://pic2recipe.csail.mit.edu/. Accessed 13 June 2022., and Popovski, Gorjan, et al. “FoodBase Corpus: A New Resource of
Annotated Food Entities.” Database: The Journal of Biological Databases and Curation, vol. 2019, Nov. 2019, p. baz121. PubMed Central,
https://doi.org/10.1093/database/baz121.
28 For more detail on the transition from fireplace to cookstove, see Brewer, Priscilla J. From Fireplace to Cookstove: Technology and the Domestic

Ideal in America. Syracuse University Press, 2000.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

of course, also tends to be significant delays in technological uptake in rural
kitchens or households with limited access to the supplies abundant in urban
environments.
The recipe form and genre conventions also shifted significantly at the end
of the period. Due to the rise of domestic science and scientific cookery at
the end of the nineteenth century, recipes became much more standardized
and cooking itself professionalized. Recipes from the mid to early nineteenth
century are written in a more descriptive style, with instructions and calls for
ingredients intermixed with prose. Recipes at the end of the period would
look more familiar to cooks today, as their ingredients are placed at the top
of the recipe with standardized measurements and the recipes themselves are
longer and more detailed and often lack the more narrative or folklorish style
29
more prevalent prior to the rise of domestic science.
The final point of departure from contemporary recipes is the way
nineteenth-century recipes cling to a manuscript and oral culture. As
rhetorician Sarah Walden notes, Southern cookbooks are uniquely important
to American domestic print culture. Due to the South’s rural and agrarian
culture, cookbooks primarily remained in manuscript form until well into the
nineteenth century. Few commercially published cookbooks were produced
in the South and those that did were typically printed locally with few
editions in circulation (83). Many nineteenth-century recipes reflect this tie
to oral or manuscript culture through vague instructions to “sweeten to
taste” or “bake in the usual way,” which assume prior knowledge or universal
training on the behalf of the reader. Figures 2 and 3 show two recipes for the
same cake, one published at mid-period and one at the end of the nineteenth
century. The recipes, when read together, demonstrate how the form and
generic conventions evolved rather quickly in the nineteenth century, shifting
from a more narrative style to a formulaic style.
My initial training set consisted of one thousand published recipes that I
sourced from books available through Project Gutenberg, and only those
30
published in the United States. This training data is available, open-source,
31
on Github. Notably, the model could not successfully identify newspaper
recipes using the dataset of commercially published recipes alone. However,
as I added newspaper recipes to the training data and retrained the model, its
accuracy increased significantly.

29 For more on the rise of the domestic science movement, see Neuhaus, Jessamyn. Manly Meals and Mom’s Home Cooking: Cookbooks and

Gender in Modern America. JHU Press, 2012., and Matthews, Glenna. “Just a Housewife”: The Rise and Fall of Domesticity in America.
Oxford University Press, 1989.
30 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/bookshelf/419
31 Blankenship, Avery. “A Dataset of Nineteenth-Century American Recipes,” Viral Texts: Mapping Networks of Reprinting in 19th-Century

Newspapers and Magazines. 2021. https://github.com/ViralTexts/nineteenth-century-recipes/

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Figure 2. Recipe for Election Cake from Lydia Maria Child’s The American Frugal Housewife (1838) courtesy of
HathiTrust.

Figure 3. Recipe for Election Cake from Fannie Farmer’s The Boston Cooking School Cook Book (1901) courtesy of
HathiTrust.

Using Document Vectors in a Classification Problem
In this section, I will describe the general technical workflow I used for
training my Doc2Vec model as well as the logistic regression model for
classification. While I will use correct technical terms, so that readers familiar
with such methods can assess my work, I will explain each step for readers less
familiar with these methods. After compiling my initial set of training data, I
trained a Doc2Vec model using Python’s Gensim library which includes a fast
and robust instantiation of Doc2Vec. I began by importing my recipe training

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

data into a dataframe, which is similar to a spreadsheet in Python, and adding
a column to tag each of the recipes as “recipe.” Adding the “recipe” column
ensures that when the model is being trained, that it has access to both
the text of each recipe and the label which will later identify the text as a
recipe to the logistic regression model. I then pulled in hand-tagged generic
training data from the Viral Texts project, which is available on Github which
includes examples of news, advertisements, poetry, and literature all pulled
32
from newspapers. This hand-tagged training data was pulled into a single
dataframe and tagged “not recipe.” With this done, the text in my corpus
was either text that belonged to the “recipe” category or text that belonged
to the “not recipe” category. Once all of the data was assigned a category
label, I “cleaned,” or standardized it, by lowercasing all of the words and
removing punctuation, which prevents words with varying punctuation and
capitalization from being mistaken for distinct words. I did not correct any
OCR errors given the research described above.
After cleaning the data, I trained a Doc2Vec model. When a Doc2Vec model
is trained using binary tags—with only two labels—document vectors are
only generated for each label rather than for each individual document,
resulting in a much smaller model. Ultimately, this means that my model was
not interested in learning the distinct features of each individual document in
a particular category, but more so understanding that features the documents
in that category share. This method is particularly efficient for downstream
classification problems because the Doc2Vec model has the ability to infer
a vector for new, or unseen, documents and assign it a label based on
how similar that document is to other documents within one of the two
categories. This means that Doc2Vec, since it is trained to understand what
features documents in a particular category share, is able to take new
documents, analyze their features, or determine their vectors, and then place
these new documents in a location in vector space that is close to other
documents in the same category which is a workflow that Word2Vec, since it
considers individual words, is not able to do. With the binary model trained,
I then used the model to pipeline into training a logistic regression model.
By pipeline, I mean that I took the Doc2Vec model and its vectors which
represents the contextual or semantic relationships between documents in
two classes, and used that data as training data for a logistic regression model.
The logistic regression model is what would then allow me to introduce
newspaper texts that the model has not seen before in order to determine
which category the text belongs to.
After developing the classification pipeline, I sampled one thousand random
clusters, or groupings of newspaper articles, from the Viral Texts newspaper
corpus so that I could introduce newspaper recipes to my model and retrain

32 https://github.com/ViralTexts/viral-texts-classification/tree/master/hand-tagged

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

it as I increased the training data to include more of these recipes. In order to
ensure that at least one item in that random sampling would include a recipe,
I sampled one thousand random clusters that had at least one occurrence
of the word “recipe.” These random samples were then given to the logistic
regression model to classify as either “recipe” or “not recipe.” However,
although I required the appearance of the word “recipe” in this initial
sampling in order to ensure that there would be some recipe representation
that I could then use to introduce my model to more newspaper recipes,
the model was also successful at categorizing recipes which did not include
the word “recipe.” The initial model, trained on printed and commercialized
recipes, only achieved an accuracy score of approximately fifty percent,
meaning it was only accurately classifying recipes given a random sample
of newspaper data fifty percent of the time. Following the classification,
I worked through the clusters myself and corrected any major
misclassifications. This new newspaper data was introduced to the Doc2Vec
model and used to retrain to increase accuracy. As I added more and more
newspaper recipes to the training data, the logistic regression model became
significantly more adept at classifying recipes. I was eventually able to achieve
an accuracy score of seventy-one percent with a final training set of 2,110
recipes—over half of which were newspaper recipes.

Challenging Genre with Recipes
That the model was not particularly successful at identifying recipes from
a training set of newspaper recipes alone, but improved dramatically once
newspaper recipes were incorporated into the training data, suggests two
things. The first is simply that the model became better at identifying recipes
because the newspaper recipes added to the training set included similar OCR
errors to those found in the random clusters it was then asked to identify.
Second, this indicates that there is some generic or formal difference between
recipes that appear in the newspaper and recipes that appear in published
books. My initial goal in developing the classification pipeline for the Viral
Texts newspaper corpus was simply to locate recipes. The final model, which
has a seventy percent accuracy rate, does serve as an efficient way to pull the
somewhat elusive texts out of mountains of newspaper pages. However, an
unexpected result of this classification task was the sheer number of cases
in which the model identified a text that may not be considered a recipe
at first glance but certainly utilizes the recipe form. These recipes, which
I refer to as “recipe-adjacent” texts, demonstrate both the flexibility of the
recipe form as well as its usefulness beyond the domestic sphere. These recipes
also exemplify the usefulness of computational classification for identifying
generic adaptation and fluidity.
Sari Edelstein writes that women writers of the nineteenth century used
the newspaper to “telegraph their engagement with the sociopolitical world”
(6). Many of these writers, as I will demonstrate, also recognized the power
of domestic forms such as the recipe. Rather than using the masculineJournal of Cultural Analytics

17

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Figure 5. A recipe for cooking husbands. December 31, 1885 edition of the South Carolina Anderson Intelligencer

associated essay form, women writers used the recipe to disseminate their
political opinions, allowing them to challenge social norms from the safety
of a genre associated with domesticity and the home. Pulling double duty,
recipe-adjacent texts operate as both socially acceptable jests and political
prescription. For example, Figure 5 depicts a recipe titled “A Recipe for
Cooking Husbands” that is attributed to “a Baltimore lady.” This recipe, as
identified by the model, adopts a teasing tone to describe how a wife should
manage her husband, suggesting that a husband should be stewed, roasted,
or pickled. However, beneath the teasing tone is an air of commiseration.
The writer acknowledges the limited power that women have over their
husbands in the home, warning women to not select their husband based
solely on material wealth. By presenting this text as a recipe rather than a
more traditional narrative or essay, the “Baltimore lady” is able to subversively
communicate to other women the difficulty of gendered expectations in the
home without appearing to transgress social expectations.
Existing scholarship on the topic of non-culinary recipes tends to focus on
33
either their narrative style or their teasing tone. I wish to bridge these
conversations to address how the recipe form allows writers to both tease
and prescribe actions to the reader through narrative. The appearance of
these recipes in the nineteenth-century newspaper moves the recipe form out
of the domestic sphere and into public discourse. Jennifer Rachel Dutch

33 See Joensuu, Juri. “Fictitious Meals, Culinary Constraints: The Recipe Form in Four Oulipian Texts.” Poetics Today, vol. 42, no. 4, Dec.

2021, pp. 575–95. DOI.org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.1215/03335372-9356868 and Dutch, Jennifer Rachel. “Not Just for Laughs:
Parody Recipes in Four Community Cookbooks.” Western Folklore, vol. 77, no. 3/4, 2018, pp. 249–76.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

defines “joke recipes” as “vignettes of frustrated domesticity” and as an
“identifiable form of folk humor” (251). Certainly, this recipe for cooking
husbands fits Dutch's description. However, while Dutch primarily focuses
on joke recipes that circulate amongst women readers through community or
church cookbooks, removing a joke recipe from the context of a cookbook
and circulating it to a broader newspaper audience introduces new levels of
political engagement—a type of engagement that pushes domestic writing
forms into public discourse and demonstrates the significance of the recipe
form to those outside the kitchen. Juri Joensuu describes “literary recipes” as
recipes that work “against our expectations by using the instantly recognizable
form for nonculinary purposes” (579). He continues that infeasibility, “is an
important factor that distinguishes literary recipes from real ones, even if the
difference is always open to interpretation” (582). However, the infeasibility
of literary recipes and the folk humor of joke recipes does not fully account
for the ways in which the recipe form was taken up and adapted by writers in
the newspaper. Accounting for the diverse applications of the recipe form in
periodicals allows us to understand the political potential of recipes and the
ways recipes were used to both commiserate with readers and prescribe social
change, particularly for middle- and working-class readers.
With the advent of the penny press in the 1830s, mass-produced newspapers
made broader reading accessible to middle- and working-class readers at
minimal cost. While newspapers became rapidly more affordable, printed
books still remained costly. Printed and commercialized cookbooks, in
particular, were written for an affluent audience. The cookbook reader was
often a literate, middle-class housewife who read the recipes more than she
implemented them. Megan Elias writes that “when she read cookbooks, then,
the middle-class housewife did so as a reader, rather than as a worker” (15).
She might step into the kitchen to prepare a dessert or two—cookbooks
in the nineteenth century are heavily focused on indulgences such as
desserts—but rarely are cookbooks written with servants or working-class
people in mind. Instead, they are written in such a way that domesticity, or
at least the domestic ideal, is not accessible to the working class. Domesticity,
then, is positioned as stable, impenetrable, and unreachable. Because
published cookbooks would not have been as accessible to the working
class or the lower-middle class, the domestic ideal as configured in their
recipes is mediated to them by the middle-to-upper-middle class mistress.
While innovations in printing technology made cookbooks more widely
available, much of the writing is still aimed at emulating a more affluent
34
class. Jessamyn Neuhaus writes that the trouble with studying prescriptive
literature like cookbooks is that they can only account for the advice provided
by authority figures, not what people actually did (3). Thus, the commercial

34 See Neuhaus, Jessamyn. Manly Meals and Mom’s Home Cooking: Cookbooks and Gender in Modern America. JHU Press, 2012.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Figure 6. A recipe for a cheap ice-chest. July 4th, 1871 edition of the Chicago Tribune

cookbook represents the author or editor’s idea of what American cooking
should be as well as how a house should be managed. This aspiration may or
may not have actually been put into practice.
Newspaper recipes, by contrast, defy the generic expectations of the
cookbook recipe. While cookbook recipes are more focused on making an
argument as to what the American domestic ideal looks and tastes like,
the public platform of the nineteenth-century newspaper allows writers to
position themselves as knowledgeable instructors of topics other than food.
The recipe form as it is presented in the newspaper becomes fluid and flexible,
allowing a particular type of expression that is not quite achievable through
the use of other forms. These recipes also tend to be focused more on mutual
aid: on helping the reader, often to save money, without emphasizing class
differences or appearances. For example, Figure 6 is a recipe for a cheap icechest which instructs the reader to construct an ice-chest using two dry-goods
boxes, explaining that “for family use, this has proved quite as serviceable and
as economical as more costly ‘refrigerators’.” The recipe, identified as such
within the text and by the model, is focused not so much on instructing the
reader as to the most effective way to make a cheap ice-chest but more so on
presenting the reader with an alternative to what the recipe calls “more costly
‘refrigerators.’”
Just as the recipe for the ice-chest is focused less on positioning the writer
as an absolute authority, the recipe in Figure 7, a recipe for making pencil
writing indelible, provides mutual aid in the form of a simple, economical
solution to a common problem, and particularly those writing to soldiers.
This distinction in authority from the recipe for cooking husbands, which
positions the writer as a knowledgeable instructor, is that the writers in
Figure 6 and Figure 7 are positioned more as friends offering a suggestion for
something that they have found useful. This distinction may largely be based
on class and social rank. While the recipe for cooking husbands is clearly
speaking to a more affluent group of women, women who are courted and
Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Figure 7. A recipe to make pencil writing indelible. December 24th, 1864 edition of the Chicago Tribune

who will manage a household, the recipe for the ice-box is more focused
on saving money and the recipe for pencil writing on efficiency and waste.
The writer describes the purpose of the recipe as providing a “process [that]
will make lead pencil writing or drawing indelible as if done with ink.” The
recipe, which the writer describes as both an old and good one, is intended to
assist those sending letters to soldiers, to ensure that their letters will not be
damaged as letters often are in transit. The casual, conversational tone of the
recipe suggests that the writer is less interested in commanding or monitoring
the reader’s behavior and more in offering friendly advice. This focus on
casualty differs largely from published cookbooks in the period which are
much more invested in training women to adhere to a domestic ideal. For
example, Lydia Maria Child’s The American Frugal Housewife (1829) and
Mary Randolph’s The Virginia Housewife (1824) which promote and help
to establish New England cuisine and Southern cuisine respectively. These
cookbooks are designed to be less advice manuals and more instructions for
what it means to be a New England or Southern housewife. To defy their
carefully laid out instructions is to defy domesticity.
These recipe-adjacent texts take up the recipe form to share friendly advice,
advice that is removed from the vision of domesticity presented in published
cookbooks though still presented within the context of a socially approved
domestic writing form. The recipe form in these cases is both literary and
common, allowing writers to establish rapport with readers and to provide
context for the recipe. The ubiquitous nature of prescriptive writing, by
contrast, positions the writer as an expert who is uniquely suited to the
prescribed tasks. In cookbooks, this specialized knowledge is often wielded to

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

prescribe the author’s idea of ideal domesticity, while the newspaper recipe
is much less invested in reifying social stratifications. This may be because
the intended audience of a cookbook, a housewife who is likely responsible
for a small fleet of servants, differs greatly from the audience of a newspaper,
which includes working-class people seeking alternatives to new and costly
technologies. The newspaper recipe is intended to be practiced by the reader,
whereas the cookbook recipe is more likely to be read by a mistress and
then dictated to a servant or enslaved person. These distinct readerships
demonstrate the different kinds of knowledge that members of differing social
classes have access to. The published cookbook emphasizes respectability and
control over one’s household, the author is positioned as an authoritative
expert and the recipes are typically promised to be tried and tested to ensure
their quality. The newspaper recipe, and particularly the recipe-adjacent text,
opens up this authoritative form to members of other classes who otherwise
would have found the cookbook inaccessible for many reasons. With access to
the form through the newspaper, the form is opened up for intervention and
its boundaries are pushed to include a more colloquial tone and sometimes
even a distancing from domesticity.
Where the two forms intersect is in their ability to support social
commentary. While the published cookbook is much more likely to offer
commentary on what is respectable and appropriate in the home, with some
exceptions such as The Woman Suffrage Cook Book (1886). Even the names of
dishes—Election Cake, Lincoln Cake, etc.—point to a patriotic undertone.
Recipe-adjacent texts, however, push social commentary outside of the home
and towards larger, national politics. In Figure 8, the recipe “To Kill a Town”
adopts a tone that is both teasing and authoritative. The recipe describes how
towns are destroyed, including steps such as driving business away to big cities
and indulging the vices of young people. The instructions provided include:
“underrate every present and prospective public enterprise,” “withhold the
patronage from your merchants and tradesmen,” and “if you have job
printing to be done, send it to a city office.” Although the recipe is playfully
written, the specificity of the instructions indicates real concern over the
death of small towns, a phenomenon particularly pertinent to middle- and
working-class people at this moment in the period. The commentary in
this recipe could even be connected to broader concerns among the public
regarding mass-industrialization. In any case, the clear purpose of the recipe
to kill a town is to express dissent and civil unrest rather than represent the
stability and control that recipes in published books often do.
By invoking the recipe form, the writer is able to subvert domestic authority
but in a way that almost feels like an inside joke. While cookbooks are often
written to act as a regulatory force of domesticity, the recipe-adjacent text
flips that role on its head to reveal how well equipped the language and genres
of domesticity are to conveying civil unrest and disobedience to a broader
readership. To the untrained eye, the self identification as a recipe may have
Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Figure 8. Recipe to kill a town. April 30th, 1873 edition of The Newberry Herald

even prompted a reader to skip over the article without reading it. To those
in the know, however, rebellion and political strife are conveyed through
the guise of the very symbol of domestic ideology and contentedness. The
recipe genre and form works so well, is so covert in its conveyance of political
opinion and class transgression, that it has even managed to go undetected
by many who study newspapers or recipes. Without the model identifying
these recipes as such, I likely wouldn’t have paused over them for very long,
myself, and my understanding of what recipes are and how they worked in
the nineteenth-century would have still been limited to culinary purposes.
Of course on one hand, that would mean that the recipe-adjacent texts are
doing the work that they are intended to do. On the other hand, the absence
of these recipes from broader conversations about newspaper writing and
public platforms in the nineteenth century leaves out many writers for whom
the recipe was the most useful or even safe form through which to convey
such radical political ideas. The model, however, was able to see things that
I couldn’t see and in doing so, helped me expand and reflect on my own
understanding of what a recipe is.
Formally, the pipeline reveals structures of the recipe which are
counterintuitive. Namely, that the structure of recipes leans less of food
words—which can vary significantly from region to region and from culinary
style to culinary style—and more so on instructional and measurement
words. According to this view of recipes which the model makes evident,
the recipe, as a formal structure, can broadly be understood as short-form,
instructional writing where actions, thoughts, or advice is prescribed
according to measurements given at varying degrees of precision. This

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

definition of the recipe form has very little to do with cooking and yet,
the broader view of what recipes are and what kinds of messages they are
useful for aren’t outside the purview of the culinary, either. This expansive
definition of the form poses the question: can the political agenda of
chocolate cake coexist with commentary on society? Are the two messages
implied by either equally useful to their readers, though for different reasons?
And more importantly: Are the politics of the average citizen usefully
couched in the forms and rhetoric of the domestic sphere which offers covert
pathways for political critique without the risk of public scrutiny?

Conclusion
When researchers only attend to recipes as they appear in published
cookbooks, they overlook an entire subgenre of recipes that circulated in
nineteenth-century newspapers. Incorporating these texts into scholarship
on recipes is essential because they offer a different perspective on the use
and uptake of the recipe form in public spaces. The recipe form is far
more flexible and adaptable than previous scholarship might suggest. From
recipes for ice-boxes to cooking husbands, the recipe form as it was taken
up in the nineteenth-century newspaper demonstrates the unexpected ways
domestic writing forms permeated public discourse, including ways that are
not necessarily tied to the home or to kitchens.
That being said, these texts cannot be studied if researchers cannot locate
them. The chaos of the newspaper page makes identifying recipes at a
glance incredibly challenging, and their idiosyncratic form cannot easily be
translated into keywords for database searches. Using computational methods
allows readers to not only identify recipes in newspapers, but also recipeadjacent texts that can expand our understanding of the form. Recipeadjacent texts like those discussed above broaden scholarship on domestic
writing forms and their uptake in public platforms, allowing us to understand
the unique affordances the recipe form offers nineteenth-century writers.
These affordances allow the writer to position themselves as both
knowledgeable expert and friendly neighbor. The colloquial tone of
newspaper recipes and their divergence from the authoritative book recipe,
in turn, highlights the usefulness of the recipe form to those who would
have found the published cookbook inaccessible, that same cookbook which
describes servants and other members of the working-class as lazy or
stubborn. Bringing the recipe into a public platform like the newspaper
extends access to its usefulness to writers who otherwise would have been
locked out of the readership of book-recipes. In this way, the recipe form is
opened up for intervention and its boundaries shifted beyond the scope of
the middle-class household and made to be reflective of lower-middle-class
and working-class needs. Once these boundaries shift, the form does too,
defying the often middle and upper-class understanding of recipes to include
the language of the everyday—a language that does not neatly conform to any
singular form.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Scholars who study the nineteenth century have much to gain from focusing
on the ways forms shift and are stretched by different readers and writers.
The affordances of digital humanities methods, which allow for the sorting
and classification of numerous pages of text, can bring these forms to the
forefront of attention where they might have otherwise been lost to the
human eye. While scholars have made progress in leaps and bounds when
it comes to the study of recipes, these studies still out of necessity privilege
the published cookbook, which reflects primarily the interests of a affluent,
middle-class reader and a writer attempting to prescribe their own brand
of domesticity to their readers, one that often mocks servants or deems
them a necessary evil. Expanding these studies to include the other places
that recipes are printed–for instance the newspaper–not only broadens the
intended readership of the piece but also expands our understanding of what
a recipe is, what a recipe gets to be, and how importantly a recipe will be
regarded—all of which are decisions we get to make, fluid as they may be.
Data Repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/QZTGLC
Peer reviewers: Katherine Bode, Paul Fyfe
Submitted: January 08, 2024 EDT, Accepted: February 27, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

works cited
Betti, Arianna, and Hein van den Berg. “Modelling the History of Ideas.” British Journal for the
History of Philosophy, vol. 22, no. 4, July 2014, pp. 812–35. Taylor and Francis+NEJM,
https://doi.org/10.1080/09608788.2014.949217.
Bode, Katherine. “The Equivalence of ‘Close’ and ‘Distant’ Reading; or, Toward a New Object for
Data-Rich Literary History.” Modern Language Quarterly, vol. 78, no. 1, Mar. 2017, pp.
77–106. Silverchair, https://doi.org/10.1215/00267929-3699787.
Bowker, Geoffrey C., and Susan Leigh Star. Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences.
MIT Press, 2000, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/6352.001.0001.
Brewer, Priscilla J. From Fireplace to Cookstove: Technology and the Domestic Ideal in America.
Syracuse University Press, 2000.
Brodhead, Richard H. Cultures of Letters: Scenes of Reading and Writing in Nineteenth-Century
America. University of Chicago Press, 1993.
Broersma, Marcel, and Frank Harbers. “Exploring Machine Learning to Study the Long-Term
Transformation of News.” Digital Journalism, vol. 6, no. 9, Oct. 2018, pp. 1150–64. Taylor and
Francis+NEJM, https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2018.1513337.
Cordell, Ryan. “‘Q i-Jtb the Raven’: Taking Dirty OCR Seriously.” Book History, vol. 20, no. 1,
2017, pp. 188–225. Project MUSE, https://doi.org/10.1353/bh.2017.0006.
D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren F. Klein. Data Feminism. MIT Press, 2020, https://doi.org/
10.7551/mitpress/11805.001.0001.
Dobson, James. “Interpretable Outputs: Criteria for Machine Learning in the Humanities.” Digital
Humanities Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 2, June 2020.
Drucker, Johanna. “Why Distant Reading Isn’t.” PMLA, vol. 132, no. 3, May 2017, pp. 628–35.
Cambridge University Press, https://doi.org/10.1632/pmla.2017.132.3.628.
Dutch, Jennifer Rachel. “Not Just for Laughs: Parody Recipes in Four Community Cookbooks.”
Western Folklore, vol. 77, no. 3/4, 2018, pp. 249–76.
Edelstein, Sari. Between the Novel and the News: The Emergence of American Women’s Writing.
University of Virginia Press, 2014. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/
lib/northeastern-ebooks/detail.action?docID=3444159.
Elias, Megan J. Food on the Page: Cookbooks and American Culture. University of Pennsylvania Press,
2017, https://doi.org/10.9783/9780812294033.
Fagan, Benjamin. “Chronicling White America.” American Periodicals: A Journal of History &
Criticism, vol. 26, no. 1, 2016, pp. 10–13.
Gabi, Kirilloff. “Computation as Context: New Approaches to the Close/Distant Reading Debate.”
College Literature, vol. 49, no. 1, 2022, pp. 1–25. Project MUSE, https://doi.org/10.1353/
lit.2022.0000.
Gagliano, Andrea, et al. “Intersecting Word Vectors to Take Figurative Language to New Heights.”
CLfL@NAACL-HLT, 2016. Semantic Scholar, https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/w16-0203.
Garvey, Ellen Gruber. Writing with Scissors: American Scrapbooks from the Civil War to the Harlem
Renaissance. OUP USA, 2012.
Guarneri, Julia. Newsprint Metropolis: City Papers and the Making of Modern Americans.
University of Chicago Press, 2017, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226341477.001.0001.
Jockers, Matthew, and Julia Flanders. A Matter of Scale. Faculty Publications -- Department of
English, Mar. 2013, https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/englishfacpubs/106.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Joensuu, Juri. “Fictitious Meals, Culinary Constraints: The Recipe Form in Four Oulipian Texts.”
Poetics Today, vol. 42, no. 4, Dec. 2021, pp. 575–95. DOI.org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.1215/
03335372-9356868.
King, Rachael Scarborough. “The Scale of Genre.” New Literary History, vol. 52, no. 2, 2021, pp.
261–84. Project MUSE, https://doi.org/10.1353/nlh.2021.0012.
Klein, Lauren F. “Dimensions of Scale: Invisible Labor, Editorial Work, and the Future of
Quantitative Literary Studies.” PMLA, vol. 135, no. 1, Jan. 2020, pp. 23–39. Cambridge
University Press, https://doi.org/10.1632/pmla.2020.135.1.23.
---. “The Image of Absence: Archival Silence, Data Visualization, and James Hemings.” American
Literature, vol. 85, no. 4, Dec. 2013, pp. 661–88. read-dukeupress-edu.ezproxy.neu.edu,
https://doi.org/10.1215/00029831-2367310.
Kusner, Matt J., et al. From Word Embeddings To Document Distances. p. 10.
Latham, Rob. Science Fiction Criticism: An Anthology of Essential Writings. Bloomsbury Academic,
2017. DOI.org (Crossref), https://doi.org/10.5040/9781474248655.
Le, Quoc V., and Tomas Mikolov. Distributed Representations of Sentences and Documents.
arXiv:1405.4053, arXiv, 22 May 2014. arXiv.org, http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.4053.
Lee, Benjamin. “Compounded Mediation: A Data Archaeology of the Newspaper Navigator
Dataset.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 015, no. 4.
Long, Hoyt, and Richard Jean So. “Literary Pattern Recognition: Modernism between Close
Reading and Machine Learning.” Critical Inquiry, vol. 42, no. 2, 2016, pp. 235–67,
https://doi.org/10.1086/684353.
Lynch, Deidre. “Paper Slips: Album, Archiving, Accident.” Studies in Romanticism, vol. 57, no. 1,
2018, pp. 87–119. Project MUSE, https://doi.org/10.1353/srm.2018.0004.
Matthews, Glenna. “Just a Housewife”: The Rise and Fall of Domesticity in America. Oxford
University Press, 1989.
Mikolov, Tomas, et al. “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their
Compositionality.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 26, Curran
Associates, Inc., 2013. Neural Information Processing Systems, https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
paper/2013/hash/9aa42b31882ec039965f3c4923ce901b-Abstract.html.
Mutuvi, Stephen, et al. “Evaluating the Impact of OCR Errors on Topic Modeling.” Maturity and
Innovation in Digital Libraries, edited by Milena Dobreva et al., Springer International
Publishing, 2018, pp. 3–14. Springer Link, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-04257-8_1.
Nelson, Laura K. “Leveraging the Alignment between Machine Learning and Intersectionality:
Using Word Embeddings to Measure Intersectional Experiences of the Nineteenth Century U.S.
South.” Poetics, vol. 88, Oct. 2021, p. 101539. ScienceDirect, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.poetic.2021.101539.
Neuhaus, Jessamyn. Manly Meals and Mom’s Home Cooking: Cookbooks and Gender in Modern
America. JHU Press, 2012, https://doi.org/10.56021/9780801871252.
Roggenkamp, Karen. Narrating the News: New Journalism and Literary Genre in Late NineteenthCentury American Newspapers and Fiction. The Kent State University Press, 2005. ProQuest
Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/northeastern-ebooks/
detail.action?docID=3118710.
Schöch, Christof. “Topic Modeling Genre: An Exploration of French Classical and Enlightenment
Drama.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 011, no. 2, May 2017.
Schudson, Michael. Discovering The News: A Social History Of American Newspapers. Basic Books,
1981.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

What We Didn’t Know a Recipe Could Be: Political Commentary, Machine Learning Models, and the Fluidity of Form in …

Smith, David A., et al. “Computational Methods for Uncovering Reprinted Texts in Antebellum
Newspapers.” American Literary History, vol. 27, no. 3, Sept. 2015, pp. E1–15. Silverchair,
https://doi.org/10.1093/alh/ajv029.
Stewart, David M. Reading and Disorder in Antebellum America. The Ohio State University Press,
2011.
Theophano, Janet. Eat My Words: Reading Women’s Lives Through the Cookbooks They Wrote. St.
Martin’s Publishing Group, 2016.
Todorov, Konstantin, and Giovanni Colavizza. An Assessment of the Impact of OCR Noise on
Language Models. arXiv:2202.00470, arXiv, 26 Jan. 2022. arXiv.org, http://arxiv.org/abs/
2202.00470.
Underwood, Ted. Distant Horizons: Digital Evidence and Literary Change. University of Chicago
Press, 2019, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226612973.001.0001.
---. “Genre Theory and Historicism.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 2, no. 2, Oct. 2016, p.
11063. culturalanalytics.org, https://doi.org/10.22148/16.008.
Walker, Daniel, et al. “Evaluating Models of Latent Document Semantics in the Presence of OCR
Errors.” Faculty Publications, Jan. 2010, https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/facpub/1648.
Warhol-Down, Robyn and American Council of Learned Societies. The Work of Genre Selected
Essays from the English Institute. English Institute in collaboration with the American Council of
Learned Societies, 2011.
Williams, Lyneise. “What Computational Archival Science Can Learn from Art History and
Material Culture Studies.” 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), 2019,
pp. 3153–55. IEEE Xplore, https://doi.org/10.1109/bigdata47090.2019.9006527.
Zboray, Ronald J., and Mary Saracino Zboray. “Is It a Diary, Commonplace Book, Scrapbook, or
Whatchamacallit?: Six Years of Exploration in New England’s Manuscript Archives.” Libraries &
the Cultural Record, vol. 44, no. 1, 2009, pp. 101–23. Project MUSE, https://doi.org/10.1353/
lac.0.0055.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

