Gilkison, Aaron, and Maciej Kurzynski. “Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and
Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao),
1956-1989.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 1, May 2024,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.115481.

ARTICLE

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in
the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1956-1989
Aaron Gilkison1, Maciej Kurzynski2
1 Stanford University, 2 Lingnan University

Keywords: PRC, violence, soldier, People's Liberation Army Daily, computational criticism, distribution of the sensible, China
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.115481

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 1, 2024

From personal memoirs and cooking recipes to revolutionary agitation and war
coverage, the People’s Liberation Army Daily offers a wealth of insights into the
sociopolitical and affective realities of post-1949 China. One of the few major
periodicals that continued publication during the Cultural Revolution
(1966-1976), the journal has received relatively scant attention from scholars,
except for political science studies devoted to the PRC propaganda system.
Combining close reading and historical analysis with quantitative conceptuality
and text mining, we demonstrate how the PLA Daily legitimizes state violence
differently through its representation of various soldier figures, the zhanshi, the
junren, and the minbing. We also use a large language model to show how the
journal distributes violent sentiments to international topics in times of
domestic turmoil.

「杀人有两种，一种是用枪杆子杀人，一种是用笔杆子
杀人。」
“There are two ways to kill people: one is with the barrel of a
gun, the other is with the pen.”
– Mao Zedong 毛泽东

Introduction
How state violence acquires legitimacy within a given political order is a
question that occupied major philosophers and political thinkers of the
twentieth century. Grappling with this question has yielded some of the
key concepts in modern violence studies, including “state of exception”
(Schmitt; Agamben), “monopoly on violence” (Weber), and “distribution
of the sensible” (Rancière), which together lay the groundwork for
understanding how states normalize the use of force and manufacture
affective compliance. The present article integrates these theoretical insights
with existing historical scholarship to probe the processes of legitimation of
state violence in the People’s Republic of China (PRC). Sociologists and
political scientists have identified full-scale war mobilization as the primary
means through which the Chinese Communist Party grasped power and
ultimately took over the country in 1949 (Perry; Shambaugh, “The Soldier

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

and the State”; Walder; Xun). Literary scholars and art historians, while
certainly recognizing the power of the gun, have lent more focus to formal
and cultural mechanisms which harnessed political energy for the dual
purpose of proletarian revolution and nation making (B. Wang, The Sublime
Figure; Ji; Pang; Mittler; Lee, Revolution of the Heart). In this context, our
study takes a novel approach which combines close reading and historical
analysis with quantitative conceptuality and text mining. We focus on one of
the most important official publications of the PRC, the People’s Liberation
Army Daily or Jiefangjun Bao 解放军报 (hereafter PLA Daily), to explore
three major questions: what was the journal’s role in legitimizing state
violence, how was the Chinese soldier imagined and institutionalized in this
important official publication, and how were violent sentiments distributed
discursively across different topics in the aftermath of the communist
takeover. A conventional reading of the PLA Daily over the course of
four decades would be a massive and prohibitive undertaking; the growing
computational resources available to humanistic scholarship allow us to
examine the representations of violence at a macroscopic scale beyond the
reach of traditional methodologies.
Before we proceed, it is important to point out that ours is not a historical
study of violence per se but rather of its discursive-affective legitimation.
While we do draw extensively upon existing definitions of violence (Ganesan
and Kim's formulation (3), “the state’s utilization of its apparatus—the
military, the police, and security agencies—in order to maintain the
unilaterally defined order of the society in question,” is particularly relevant
to our discussion), our focus is on the vocabulary distribution in a major
PRC journal and how this distribution legitimated the use of physical force in
the specific historical context of post-1949 China. The violent language used
in the PLA Daily carries official approval, since everything that was published
1
must have first passed reviews and censorship. This makes the PLA Daily
a nonpareil resource for a historically-informed exploration of how violence
and the language of violence have been mutually implicated in a feedback
loop, a loop that more than once spiraled out of control, with devastating
consequences.

To Serve the People: Modeling the Chinese soldier
From personal memoirs and cooking recipes to revolutionary agitation and
war coverage, the PLA Daily offers a wealth of insights into the sociopolitical
realities of the People’s Republic of China. One of the few major periodicals
that continued publication during the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976), the
paper has received relatively scant attention from scholars, aside from political

1 Likewise, the choice of the journal as our primary source delimits the scope of violent actors considered in this article. We are not dealing

with thugs for hire, for example, as they are not part of the state apparatus; we are not dealing with police either, as the PLA Daily is about
the military, not police.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

science studies devoted to the PRC propaganda system (Wang and Brady;
Luo; Wu and Yu; LaRocca). The establishment of the journal was part and
parcel of the aggressive post-1949 drive by the Chinese Communist Party to
standardize communication channels. Organized in November 1954 by order
of Luo Ronghuan, the Vice-Chairman of the China Military Commision
(CMC), the creation of the PLA Daily was formally approved by Mao
Zedong after request by Peng Dehuai, then China’s defense minister, in
the middle of 1955. It was to be a single newspaper under the auspices of
the CMC to ensure ideological consistency and loyalty to the Party’s core
principles across the various branches of the PLA (Zhang). Commenting on
the paper’s influence, Marshal Lin Biao stated that the journal “has not only
been highly influential in revolutionizing and educating the military, but has
also played a major role in revolutionizing the entire country” (quoted in Lu
2).
Lin Biao’s assessment speaks to the impact exerted by the PLA Daily on
the Chinese public since its first official issue on January 1, 1956. How
a newspaper originally intended for the armed forces could play such a
crucial role can be explained by the special position of the PLA in both
the political system and the social structure of the PRC. This position
crystallized when the Red Army was rebuilding in the communist capital
of Yan’an during the war against Japan and then developed to systematically
involve the military throughout society (Gittings, The Role of the Chinese
Army 79). The systematic involvement expanded the PLA’s image and its
influence while extensive political work internal to the PLA burnished the
military’s revolutionary credentials (Gittings, The Role of the Chinese Army
255). Commentaries in the PLA Daily, the official army journal, were central
to several political movements, including the publication of the Quotations
from Chairman Mao Zedong (the Little Red Book), the “Study the PLA”
initiative, and the controversy surrounding the theater piece Hai Rui
Dismissed from Office, which Mao interpreted as a thinly veiled critique
of his leadership (Lu). Likewise, in their article “Media, Environment of
Quotations, Cult of Personality,” Ting-Jun Wu and Pin-Lian Yu emphasize
the journal’s significance in promoting Mao Zedong’s cult of personality and
inciting the Red Guards’ violence. In particular, they refer to an article from
August 29, 1966, which appealed to the Red Guards to learn from the PLA
and to “study Chairman Mao’s books, listen to Chairman Mao’s words, to
act in accordance with Chairman Mao’s instructions, and to be Chairman
Mao’s good soldiers” (55, emphasis added).
But what exactly does it mean to be a good soldier in the PRC? We highlight
the word “soldiers” in Wu and Yu's quote because the image of the soldier
is one of the most ubiquitous in PRC culture. Yet, aside from the term’s
circumstantial appearance in scholarly studies of revolutionary aesthetics,
there has been little treatment of the PRC soldier qua soldier; that is, as

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

2

an agent of violence. “Soldiers” in the preceding quote is a translation of
the Chinese term zhanshi (战士), the preeminent term in the PLA Daily
referring to violent actors. There are several other terms carrying similar
connotations to zhanshi, including junren (军人), bing (兵), shibing (士兵),
and minbing (民兵), as well as terminological combinations, such as geming
junren (革命军人) or renmin zhanshi (人民战士). Rather than lumping
all of them together under one single translation, “soldier,” we acknowledge
the semantic and political tensions between such official and semi-official
designations.
For the subsequent analysis, we have selected three of the most prominent
soldier figures in the PLA Daily: zhanshi, junren, and minbing. As illustrated
in Figure 1, which shows normalized frequencies of these terms in the articles
published during the years 1956-1989, the three figures claimed the textual
space of the journal to different degrees of success and stability. As there
was only a limited number of pages and characters that could be printed in
each issue, these varying trajectories reflect the evolving economy of violence
3
in the early PRC. In this context, Giorgio Agamben's theory of violence
proves especially illuminating. One among many other mechanisms of what
Agamben refers to as the “sovereign power,” the legitimation of violence
upholds the state of exception which separates bare life, Greek zōe, from
the politically meaningful way of life proper to men, bios (Agamben 191).
Who can kill and who can be killed depends upon the soldier positionalities
identified in the official state discourse. If we think of these positionalities
as vectors in a politically defined space, then what counts is not only which
vector is the largest but also how closely it is aligned with the officially
recognized dimensions along which violence can be legitimately performed
at any given time. The division between “the People” and “people,” or the
agents and the subjects of the sovereign power, is not fixed but constantly reestablished and re-negotiated on the discursive battlefield as different soldier
figures vie for legitimacy.
To explore the differences between the three soldier figures, we first identified
words and expressions occurring in a statistically significant manner around
them. We segmented the PLA Daily articles (218,494 texts) into individual

2 In addition to the numerous studies of model soldiers such as Lei Feng and Ouyang Hai, treatments focusing specifically on the image of

the soldier or the PLA in PRC culture are rare. Some recent examples include Haiyan Lee’s studies “The Charisma of Power” and “The Soft
Power of the Constant Soldier”; Yizhong Gu's dissertation “The Myth of Voluntary Death,” which deals with sacrifice and martyrdom in
Maoist films; Xiaomei Chen’s chapter “Worker-Peasant-Soldier Literature,” which surveys several Maoist literary works written by and/or
about communist soldiers; and Ban Wang’s chapter “Art, Politics, and Internationalism in Korean War Films.” While these latter studies
address the image of the soldier or the PLA, none of them focus on the relationship between this image and the management of violence.
While Yan Xu's work The Soldier Image and State-Building in Modern China, 1924-1945 addresses the relationship between state ideology
and the soldier, Xu's focus is less on the question of violence than the model for conceptualizing the sociopolitical structure of modern
China embodied in the military. Other recent works, such as Diana Lary's China’s Civil War, Xiaobing Li's A History of the Modern Chinese
Army, and Neil Diamant's Embattled Glory also address the relationship between the PLA soldier and broader PRC culture and society, yet
they do not directly concern the relationship between the Chinese soldier and the management of violence.
3 In this sense, our argument is comparable to Alex Woloch's analysis of how narratives distribute limited textual space attention among

literary characters (Woloch 2004).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

Figure 1. Stack plot showing the distribution of soldier terms as a fraction of all words published each year in the PLA
Daily, 1956-1989.

words and sentences using the spaCy pipeline zh_core_web_lg for Python. We
then used the Fisher’s exact test to identify statistically significant collocates
4
of each soldier term (p < 0.01). By considering different context sizes (5-word
window, sentence, document), we aimed to cover the entire syntax-semantics
spectrum. To generate the final lists of collocates, we filtered out words
that co-occurred with the target terms less than 1,000 times and sorted the
remaining words in decreasing order according to the ratio of the actual
number of occurrences to the expected number of occurrences (r-exp), the
latter calculated given the overall frequency of words in the corpus.
Although we will explore the results in more detail in the following sections,
a few basic differences become evident already now from Table 1, which
displays the top five terms for each category. Zhanshi conveys a romanticized
and idealized image, often associated with Lei Feng 雷锋 (1940?-1962?), a
model soldier revered in the PRC for his selflessness and dedication. With a
deep connection to familial and rural roots, the zhanshi is deeply intertwined
with communal ethos, drawing from the concepts of “Five Virtues” and “Five
Togethers,” which emphasize moral excellence and solidarity, respectively.
Junren leans more towards the structural and functional aspects of the
military and is characterized by terms such as “demobilized,” “retired,” or
“active duty,” which all carry the administrative and bureaucratic tones of

4 The test determines the statistical significance of an event: the less likely the event (the lower the p value) the more significant its occurrence.

For instance, if an otherwise highly frequent term appears together only with the junren, this will count as a statistically unlikely, and hence
significant, event, since the null hypothesis assumes that all words are distributed randomly across the corpus. This technique has been
successfully employed in DH projects (Algee-Hewitt et al. 2020). To reduce the amount of memory required to generate the co-occurrence
matrices, we have considered only the words that appear at least 10 times in the whole corpus.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

the military life cycle. Minbing, finally, is grounded in the idea of a civilian
militia and emphasizes collective responsibility and grassroots participation in
defense matters. As illustrated in Figure 1, these three soldier positionalities
are not granted equal importance. When contrasted with junren, which refers
specifically to the individuals associated with the military institution that is
the PLA, the much more dominant zhanshi is a floating figure burgeoning
with revolutionary meaning and endowed with a higher degree of social
mobility: while a junren can be a zhanshi, the opposite is not always the case.
In other words, almost anyone with correct political characteristics and will
to revolutionary action, from women workers in civilian militias (minbing)
to teenage Red Guards and even literary figures, could be designated as a
zhanshi. They thereby become implicated in the apparatus of state violence
and acquire a mandate to engage in violence on behalf of the People. As such,
the term zhanshi serves as a univocally positive marker which the journal
utilizes to distribute the mandate for violence to its designated agents in the
PLA and beyond.

Between Junren and Zhanshi
Some of the earliest usages of junren can be traced back to the late nineteenth
century and occur in the context of military westernization/modernization
(Lo 5). The term is generally seen in similar contexts throughout the
Republican Era, both in the nationalist Kuomintang (GMD) and
Communist Party (CCP) military milieus. In the 1950s, junren appears in the
context of the PLA’s attempts to professionalize along the lines of the Soviet
Union’s armed forces (Li 114), which can be also seen in many PLA Daily
articles published during this time:
“The more advanced technology and weaponry become, and
the greater its power, the greater the demands on every military
member’s understanding, and the more solidarity is needed;
5
every soldier [junren], no matter what job they do, needs to be
more aware of the responsibilities they themselves have toward
the entire enterprise and understand their role in the larger
system” (“The Development of Military Technology and the
Role of Humans in Modern Warfare,” PLA Daily, No. 8-29,
6
1958).
Junren appears also in the context of the rational management of the military
and current and former military service-members; most common are texts
related to the systematic incorporation of the various formal, semi-formal,

5 The Chinese for “military member” here is jundui quanti renyuan 军队全体人员; this is terminologically not the same as junren, but the

equivalence is implied in the context of the subsequent lines.
6 Here and in the following quotations from PLA Daily, we provide the article’s title together with the date of publication for easier

identification, as we do not have the exact page numbers. The texts have been acquired from the digitized version of the journal available
through the East View library (https://dlib.eastview.com).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1956-1989

Table 1. Top five most significant collocates of the three major soldier designations.
Term

5-word window

nObs

r-exp

sentence

nObs

r-exp

战士
zhanshi

雷锋式 (Lei Feng-style)
五好 (Five Virtues)
超期 (extended service)
退伍 (demobilized)
警卫 (guard)

1398
11642
1144
7140
2332

24.964
19.403
16.113
13.864
13.48

五好 (Five Virtues)
退伍 (demobilized)
探家 (home visit)
家长 (parents)
入伍 (to enlist)

7784
5906
1490
2945
1004

9.779
7.992
7.641
6.913
6.877

军人
junren

残废 (disabled)
复员 (retired)
现役 (active duty)
退伍 (demobilized)
军属 (family dependents)

4042
7548
1642
6058
1468

336.833
260.276
149.273
123.633
112.923

残废 (disabled)
复员 (retired)
现役 (active duty)
军属 (family dependents)
退伍 (demobilized)

2697
4851
1237
1288
4244

基干 (core cadres)
三落实 (Three
Implementations)
预备役 (reserve duty)
大办 (to organize big-scale)
武装部 (Armed Departments)

2906
2696
1348
1250
1338

193.733
179.733
61.273
33.784
23.474

三落实 (Three
Implementations)
基干 (core cadres)
全民皆兵 (Everyone’s a
Soldier)
武装部 (Armed Departments)
预备役 (reserve duty)

2737
2738
1132
11668
1409

民兵
minbing

Journal of Cultural Analytics

document

nObs

r-exp

爱兵 (love for soldiers)
五同 (Five Togethers)
尊干 (respect for officers)
同乐 (Joy Together)
农村籍 (rural hukou)

25405
5435
11396
2001
2201

6.291
6.169
6.15
6.027
5.933

128.42
107.8
65.105
61.333
55.117

复退 (retired)
残废 (disabled)
复员 (retired)
抚恤 (compensation)
优抚 (preferential treatment)

1729
27928
61112
2398
12370

82.333
57.822
53.326
52.13
51.116

97.75
70.205
43.538
38.508
31.311

三落实 (Three
Implementations)
整组 (reorganization)
劳武 (labor and military)
民兵营 (militia battalion)
民兵团 (militia regiment)

57576
10133
20975
4927
12572

75.658
71.865
61.152
57.291
55.628

7

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

and informal groups of fighters from World War Two, the Civil War, and the
Korean War, into the PLA or into civilian work units, a process in which
7
these soldiers were known as fuyuan junren (复员军人). Furthermore, many
of the articles referencing junren from the 1950s and early 1960s deal with
the dependents of servicemembers. For example, an article from January 14,
1956, focuses on the family life of military officers. While it is concerned
predominantly with ensuring that the families of officers adhere to socialist
family values, what is of particular importance here is the recognition of
the “military officer [junguan 军官] as a long-term professional [changqi
zhiye 长期职业] working in the armed forces” (“Effectively Supporting the
8
Families of Military Officers,” PLA Daily, No. 1-14, 1956). Mentions of
junren in articles during the 1950s generally follow this trend of increasing
professionalization and rational management of the PLA.
As noted by Li, however, during the 1950s a “widening gap” emerged
between “an increasingly radicalized society and a gradually regularized
military” (114). While junren was primarily associated with the
modernization and professionalization of the military during the 1950s, the
appearance of the affectively charged zhanshi in the same period reveals the
radicalization that Li refers to but also the mounting tensions within official
discourse as to who can be considered the legitimate agent of state violence
(Figure 1). While Shambaugh (“The Soldier and the State” 533) argued that
“[p]rofessionalism and politicization are not necessarily mutually exclusive in
any army, including the Chinese,” the divergence of the professional junren
and the romanticized zhanshi becomes increasingly palpable during the most
radical decades of the 1960s and 1970s. This radicalization was partly the
result of the gradual takeover of the PLA by Mao Zedong’s allies, most
prominently the ascension in 1959 of Lin Biao to Minister of Defense in
place of Peng Dehuai, the latter of whom had consistently advocated for
9
professionalization.
Zhanshi (战士) is a much more venerable term than junren, appearing
notably in the frontier poems of the Tang Dynasty, where it invoked a
10
varied pathos of bravery, virtue, and sacrifice on behalf of the country.
In modern times, the term begins to appear in a similar romanticized and
politicized context toward the end of the nineteenth century. News reports
on the First Sino-Japanese War (1894-1895), for example, refer to soldiers

7 In his study Embattled Glory, Neil Diamant translates this latter term as “retired veterans” (Diamant; Vogel 54–59). For an example of this

process in the PLA Daily, consider the title of an article from April 6, 1957: “All Provinces and Municipalities Actively Prepare
Reintegration Work - Welcome Retired Veteran [fuyuan junren] Participation in Rural Construction.”
8 While the terms used here, junguan, is not junren, the military officer (junguan) is the managerial stratum of the junren-based military

apparatus.
9 For a more detailed discussion of the internal political mechanisms by which the PLA was slowly radicalized at the end of the 1950s and

during the early 1960s, see (Shambaugh, “The Soldier and the State” 538–39) and (Walder 196–97).
10 For an overview of Tang Dynasty frontier poetry in English, see the discussion in Owen 1996, 459–77.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

11

fighting on behalf of the Chinese nation as zhanshi. The term takes on
revolutionary connotations during the nationalist uprisings in the first decade
of the twentieth century and after the establishment of the Republic in 1912.
While both junren and zhanshi exemplified an ideal citizenry, a distinctive
feature of the zhanshi was its emphasis on romanticized death in the service
of the revolution and the nation.
The intertwining of romanticized death with the zhanshi, and the veneration
of martyrs in general, found resonance within Mao Zedong’s eschatological
Communist ideology, exemplified most prominently in his eulogy to the
soldier Zhang Side 张思德 (1915-1944). Titled “Serve the People,” Mao’s
celebrated speech from September 8, 1944 “marked the inception of the cult
of the red martyr in the history of the CCP” (Hung 280). In the PLA Daily,
the association between the Chinese zhanshi and martyrdom on behalf of
the nation and revolution is clear for the period of the late 1950s through
the end of the 1970s. For example, an article from April 30, 1959 quotes
Mao’s eulogy and commemorates the martyr An Yemin 安业民 (1938-1958),
who had sacrificed himself to save an artillery piece during the Second Taiwan
Strait Crisis in 1958, as “the figure of a truly sublime communist soldier
12
[zhanshi].” The author is quick to add, however, that An was also a farmer’s
boy with an elementary school education; he was a “normal” person and an
“everyday” zhanshi, and as such could be emulated by virtually anyone. This
agrees with Louise Edwards's argument that “China’s contribution to the
socialist realist theory of exemplars was to bring the exemplar directly into
the present world of the consumers of the narrative… close to the people”
(26). The celebration of An Yemin conveys the intention of the PLA Daily’s
editors to create a tangible relationship between the zhanshi and the reader,
whether that be a soldier in the PLA or a commoner.
As the distance between the martyr and the average person closed, model
soldiers became only the most conspicuous and well-respected zhanshi. On
the back of this highly mobile figure, the mandate for legitimate violence
spread beyond members of the regular state military apparatus. For example,
one article uses the term in reference to the writer Lu Xun (“Learning
from Mr. Lu Xun’s Fighting Spirit,” PLA Daily, No. 10-20, 1956). Another
relates the story of a mother and a sister who “not only lost their own
family members in the long and arduous revolutionary struggle, but also were
zhanshi in their own right,” since they served various civilian roles during the

11 A March 16th, 1895 article from the influential Shenbao titled “Remembering Aid for the Troops [zhanshi]” points out that the “valiant”

soldiers wounded on the battlefield are “loyal and righteous members of the Chinese nation” and that monetary contributions to provide
medical services for the wounded guarantee “that the vast expanse of China… can be preserved” 戰士銘恩," "…我兵奮勇直前多有受傷之
人… 查此受傷之人皆我華忠義之士… 我中國幅之廣人物之多茍能似此存心何患不能挽回…
12 “…Comrades, from here we witness the figure of a truly sublime communist soldier [zhanshi]!… Placing the interests of the Party and the

People above one’s own, caring for the revolution, the collective, and comrades more than for oneself, these are the fine virtues instilled in
the People’s soldiers [zhanshi] by the Party’s teachings; valiant and unyielding, with an indomitable spirit, aiming to overpower all enemies
and never submitting to any enemy, this is the glorious tradition of the People’s army under the leadership of the Party” (“The Figure of a
Sublime Communist Soldier,” PLA Daily, No. 4-30, 1959).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

communist revolution (“Glorious Mothers,” PLA Daily, No. 11-13, 1956).
PLA Daily also uses the term to refer to members of the people’s militias,
as in an article which portrays the stalwart minbing zhanshi as “loyal to the
motherland and loyal to the revolutionary enterprise” (“Exemplary Figures in
Militia Battalions,” PLA Daily, No. 8-13, 1964).
Yet the increasingly prominent label was available not only to those coming
from the ranks of the educated elite, those who had lost loved ones in
military conflict, or the junren members of the PLA. Ultimately, anyone
who sacrificed themselves on behalf of the nation could be described as
and, perhaps most crucially, describe themselves as a zhanshi. A paean from
September 10, 1958 glorifies an entire zhanshi nation:
“…Should an enemy invade the Motherland, the zhanshi of the
Steel Army will emerge from beside the blast furnaces, from
the cotton mills, from the fields, from the millstones, from
schools, from shops… from every corner of the Motherland.
They will unite into a powerful fighting force and, from all
directions, pierce the hearts of the enemy with their deadly
bullets!” (“Everyone’s a Soldier,” PLA Daily, No. 9-10, 1958)
Here, virtually everyone fighting on behalf of the Motherland is a soldier,
military member or not. As the Cultural Revolution gets underway, the
zhanshi’s mobility combines with the increasing concentration of command
over the legitimate use of force within the person of Chairman Mao to give
rise to many of the violent mass movements of the era, including that of the
Red Guards (hongweibing 红卫兵), the zealous teenage adherents of Mao
Zedong Thought who answered his call to violently attack class enemies
allegedly still lurking among the People (Thurston, Enemies; Yang). In an
article entitled “Always Following Chairman Mao to Wage Revolution” from
September 2, 1966, Red Guards are quoted as stating that “[w]e must hold
high the great banner of Mao Zedong Thought, study the PLA in great
earnest, become Red Guard zhanshi who live up to the title bestowed by
the great Commander-in-Chief Chairman Mao, and forever serve as faithful
13
servants of the People.”
During the period that the zhanshi was in the ascendant, from the increasing
politicization of the PLA in the late 1950s to the end of the Mao era in the
late 1970s, there are also articles dealing with the junren, albeit they are much
less frequent. Different from the focus in the 1950s on the management of
retired veterans and/or military families, or the reincorporation of veterans
into new military units, the emphasis on junren in the 1960s and 1970s is on
reinforcing the glorious image of veterans, their families, and, by association,

13 “Always Following Chairman Mao to Wage Revolution; Implementing the Sixteen Points Unswervingly and Fully,” PLA Daily, No. 9-2,

1966.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

the PLA and its revolutionary accomplishments of the past. This was done
through mass campaigns, referred to variously as “embrace the military and
privilege military dependents” (yongjun youshu 拥军优属) and “privilege and
care work” (youfu gongzuo 优抚工作), among other terms (Table 1). At
the same time that the PLA Daily led these mass campaigns to burnish
the revolutionary image of junren, the military dependents, and the PLA
in general, it viewed junren and other elements of the PLA bureaucracy as
14
potential sources of revolutionary force in and of themselves. Yet even in
the midst of heated revolution and attempts to mobilize the junren and its
associated groups, the term appears to maintain its association with military
organization and lacks strong affective connotation; in other words, during
this era junren remains for the most part professional as opposed to political.
As we move to the late 1970s and 1980s, there are still a large number of
articles relating the term junren to the topics commonly associated with it in
previous eras, such as military dependents and veterans. The junren is also still
associated with military professionalization and modernization. Noteworthy
during this period, however, is the junren’s increasing politicization, as it
begins to take on some of the romantic characteristics of zhanshi from
the Mao era. In what is a solid confirmation of Shambaugh’s statement
that professionalization and politicization are not mutually exclusive in the
PLA (Shambaugh, “China’s Military”), there are a large number of articles
from this period focused on the spirit and character of the junren and the
role that they are to play in and for society. For example, an article from
September 1980 calls on soldiers and cadres to avoid using foul language
(“Be Civilized, Polite Soldiers,” PLA Daily, No. 9-1, 1980). No longer is the
figure of the junren simply an individual in a military bureaucracy. Here, at
the beginning of “Reform and Opening Up,” junren is also taking on a new
moral function in society. This moralized figure of the junren is apparent in
many other articles as well, such as one which references the ongoing military
conflict between the PRC and Vietnam: “Sacrificing Oneself in the Interest
of the People is a Soldier’s Most Sublime Moral Precept” (No 12-10, 1985).
Quoting Sunzi’s The Art of War, the text lays out the essence of what the
“soldier of the new era” (xin shiqi junren 新时期军人) is supposed to be:
“The profession of the soldier [junren] is warfighting. War is
an act of violence. It is ‘the realm of life or death, the path of
being or nonbeing.’ War has always been closely linked to valor.
As such, from the first day He joins the military, a soldier must
be mentally prepared to bravely sacrifice himself to protect the
Motherland.”

14 “Calling on the Families of Martyrs and Demobilized Soldiers to Eagerly Study Chairman Mao’s Works,” PLA Daily, No. 7-31, 1966.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

And yet, despite this new ethical content of the junren in the 1980s and
its thrust toward nationalized sacrifice, its affective potential still pales in
comparison with the zhanshi. This is particularly striking in the articles
dealing with the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989. When mentioning
members of the PLA who fought against the demonstrators and/or who were
injured or killed during the conflict, the journal commonly refers to those
soldiers not as junren, a figure close at hand and imbued with the necessary
politicized connotations, but as zhanshi:
“…a small group of heartless and fanatical criminals, along with
rioters… brazenly intercepted and destroyed over a hundred
military vehicles, setting fire to and burning thirty-one of them.
Several young zhanshi were burned alive” (“Martial Law Troops
Suffer Savage Attacks from Malicious Assailants; Forced to Take
Decisive Measures after Bearing the Unbearable,” PLA Daily,
No. 6-4, 1989).
Considering the dynamic landscape of violent agency from the founding of
the PLA Daily in 1956 to the Tiananmen Square massacre of June 4th, 1989,
it becomes evident that the legitimation for this violent agency is closely tied
to the shifting positionalities of the figures of the junren and the zhanshi
within the PLA Daily. In this context, the journal emerges as a key player in
legitimizing a spectrum of violent actors, all fervently dedicated to the cause
of the People and their struggle against perceived adversaries. One can see
how the PLA Daily’s legitimation of the zhanshi, with its social mobility and
its more radical violent potential, stimulated the excessive civil violence of the
Cultural Revolution years: anyone could take on the mantle of the People’s
zhanshi and mete out fury on those people deemed enemies. It is here, in an
almost total state of exception, that Agamben's civil war between “people”
and “the People” reaches its apogee. No wonder, then, that the PLA Daily
attempts in the 1980s to walk back its legitimation of the zhanshi in favor
of the junren as the bearer of the PRC state’s mandate for violence. With
the ascent of the junren, violence on behalf of the People is safely sequestered
within the ranks of the PLA, a bureaucratic military organization under the
Party’s control. The zhanshi, that infinitely more volatile figure of the soldier,
is thereafter kept on reserve, to be unleashed whenever the simple patriotism
and professional ethic of the junren prove insufficient to spur soldiers and
civilians into violent action.

The Rise and Fall of the People’s Militia
Having outlined a genealogy of the two major soldier designations, junren
and zhanshi, we now move on to the enigmatic figure of the People’s Militia
(minbing). Here, we focus only on the militia’s accession to the status of
legitimate agents of violence during the late Cultural Revolution as well as

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

their subsequent fall from grace in the immediate post-Mao period, as seen
in Figure 1; the militia’s role in the PRC’s revolutionary history calls for an
independent, full-length examination.
June Dreyer's remains one of the few scholarly treatments of the subject
available to date. As she puts it, although in theory “the militia member is
both civilian and soldier – a productive member of society in peacetime and a
valiant warrior in time of hostilities,” in fact the militia’s role has been much
more complex in China (71). Located between people and the People, the
liminal status of the militia was epitomized in party slogans describing militia
members as striding forward “with a shovel on one shoulder and a rifle on
the other” (quoted in Dreyer 71). Despite his initial misgivings about the
local militias as remnants of the Nationalist regime, Mao Zedong’s concept
of the People’s War (renmin zhanzheng 人民战争), the “everyone’s a soldier”
campaign (quanmin jiebing 全民皆兵), and the “three implementations”
directive (san luoshi 三落实) emphasized the militia’s role in increasing
domestic production and military matters (J. C. F. Wang 542). According
to some estimates, approximately one-third of China’s entire population
enrolled in militia organizations (McCord 125). The “sea of militiamen”
was supposed to protect the country against nuclear attacks from the West
(Powell; Gittings, “China’s Militia” 104–06). These developments enhanced
the role of the militia, albeit not in a way that emphasized professional
training, thus placing them in tension with the regular armed forces (Gittings,
“China’s Militia” 107–09). Already in 1960, Ralph Powell noticed that “since
the militia is an ‘organization of the masses’ rather than a professional army,
the use of military ranks, uniforms, and salutes is frowned upon” (104).
Similarly, Dreyer argues that “the greater the defense role given to an armed
citizenry, the less the prestige of the regular army – in particular, the less the
prestige of a professionally oriented, highly specialized army equipped with
modern weapons” (74).
The rapid increase of the militia’s presence in the PLA Daily (Figure 1)
in the 1970s speaks to the editors’ recognition of the militia’s importance,
but also the militia’s own growing claims to legitimacy as agents of violence
blessed by Mao Zedong’s official endorsements (da ban minbing 大办民兵),
which could be traced back to his celebrated report on Hunan peasantry
praising the outbursts of revolutionary violence among the rural poor as
“necessary and liberating” (Walder 43). The militia’s growth posed a challenge
to the PLA, however. Close reading of the minbing-related articles published
between 1970 and 1976 reveals that the PLA Daily’s editors were at pains
to distinguish between the militia and the regular army, as in the following
Tibet-focused excerpt:
“The militiaman Tsering Dorje found an uninhabited
mountain pass [in the Kailash Mountain Range], over 60
kilometers away from his home. He encouraged seven families

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

of freed serfs to settle there. One early morning, his wife was
alerted by a dog’s bark. With her two sons, she followed the
sound and discovered a deep footprint near a mountain spring.
Soon, all mountain passes and critical routes were secured by
border troops [zhanshi] and militia [minbing]. After a relentless
24-hour search, they captured a counter-revolutionary hiding in
a rock crevice.” (“Promote the Militia, Every Citizen a Soldier,”
PLA Daily, No. 9-29, 1973)
In such quasi-novelistic passages, the official zhanshi designation is clearly
separated from the minbing, despite the overall emphasis placed on the
collaboration between the two groups, united against a common enemy, and
despite the occasional labeling of the militia as zhanshi, which we explored in
the previous section.
In addition to the patronizing distinctions, which implicitly emphasized the
higher status of the regular armed forces, the PLA also employed more direct
means to bring the violent minbing under control. Already in November
1964, a PLA Daily editorial warned that “if political implementation is
not fulfilled […] we will not be able to ensure that the guns are entirely
in the hands of reliable workers and poor and middle peasants” (“Three
Implementations for Enhancing Militia Work During the Socialist Education
Movement,” PLA Daily, No. 11-17, 1964). Similar announcements had next
to no effect in the midst of revolutionary turmoil, however. The rebel leaders
in major cities declared that the local militias were ready to seize military
control from the army (Walder 297). The tug of war continued for another
decade (J. C. F. Wang 544–47); an editorial published jointly on September
29, 1973 in the People’s Daily and the PLA Daily called again for local party
committees to reassert direct control over the armed civilians: “to properly
establish the militia, the key is to get the policy right” (“Organizing the Militia
Well,” PLA Daily, No. 9-29, 1973), but soon afterwards Wang Hongwen,
Zhang Chunqiao, and other party radicals’ support for the People’s Militia
regained momentum; based on various trade union federations and municipal
party committees in which they were personally involved, “a command
structure somewhat independent from the PLA” (J. C. F. Wang 550) was
established and a change in the PRC constitution elevated the militia to
parity with the PLA. Specifically, Article 15 of the PRC Constitution of
1975 reads: “The Chinese PLA and the militia [minbing] are the workers’
and peasants’ own armed forces led by the Communist Party of China.”
This officially acknowledged militia was instrumental in suppressing the
Tiananmen demonstrations in April 1976 sparked by the death of Premier
Zhou Enlai 周恩来 (Dittmer 53; J. C. F. Wang 553).
The trajectory of the militia’s prominence in the PRC’s socio-political sphere,
particularly as narrated in the PLA Daily, underscores the tension and the
balance of power between grassroots mobilization and centralized authority

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

in the Chinese Communist narrative. The frequent distinctions between the
militia and the PLA in official publications reflect a cautious endorsement
of the former (supported, after all, by none other but Mao Zedong), while
simultaneously keeping them distinct from the regular army. The sheer
fact that the militia could be considered legitimate agents of violence did
not diminish but rather increased the potential for tensions between the
armed civilians and the professionally trained soldiers. With the growing
professionalization of the PLA’s armed forces and the ascent of the junren
as the recognized agent of violence in the 1980s, Mao Zedong’s passing also
marked the decline of the minbing.

Distribution of violence: topic modeling the PLA Daily
If the foregoing discussion focused on different soldier figures as agents
of violence competing for legitimacy, this final section proceeds to analyze
the larger discursive-affective contexts in which those figures necessarily
participated. Here again, the concept of distribution remains crucial. Jacques
Rancière has coined the term “distribution of the sensible” (partage du
sensible) to emphasize the aesthetic dimensions of political power; the
organization of sensory experiences determines what is visible, audible, and
thinkable within the social sphere and thereby shapes the possibilities for
action and participation (Rancière 12). The term refers at once to the
“conditions for sharing that establish the contours of a collectivity (i.e.,
‘partager’ as sharing) and to the sources of disruption or dissensus of that
same order (i.e. ‘partager’ as separating)” (Panagia 103). This echoes
Agamben's notion of “civil war” between the included “People” and the
excluded “people,” which both divides society and yet “keeps it united and
constitutes it more securely than any identity” (Agamben 191). The following
analysis operationalizes this dual perspective, identifying themes in the PLA
Daily which designated the legitimate objects of violent actions and thereby
yielded themselves to violent participation.
Our first step was to collect a list of terms indicative of whether a given
text could be considered violent or not. We were interested above all in state
power and military-related violence, thus in vocabulary related to skirmishes,
battles, and full-fledged army operations, such as 屠殺 (“to slaughter”), 攻打
(“to assault”), 灾难 (“disaster”), 烧毁 (“to burn down”), 毒死 (“to poison to
15
death”). In the next step, we identified articles in which such vocabulary was
particularly prominent (at least one violent word per ten words on average)
and labeled them as “violent.” One representative passage reads as follows:

15 We have further augmented this list with semantically-proximate words identified through static word embeddings (word2vec) trained on our

corpus. The final list includes 815 unique terms.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

Under the command of the right-wing military authorities in
Indonesia, fully armed army troops, together with thousands
of rioters armed with knives, axes, clubs, and other weapons,
brutally beat, tortured, and bloodily massacred innocent and
unarmed Chinese expatriates. Not even the elderly, weak,
women, and children were spared. The atrocities of right-wing
soldiers and rioters raping Chinese women continue to occur
everywhere. In October last year, right-wing soldiers and rioters
in Qibili [齐必力, Kabil?] forced all overseas Chinese who had
once hung the flag of the People’s Republic of China to gather
together. They beat them, stole all their possessions, and cruelly
murdered local Chinese community leaders (“Indonesian
Right-Wing Forces Owe the Chinese People a Heavy Blood
Debt,” PLA Daily, No. 5-19, 1966).
We randomly selected 100 violent articles from each year and transformed
them into vector representations (embeddings) with the help of a large
encoder model. These representations were then averaged into “vectors of
16
violence” through k-means clustering. In the next step, we computed cosine
similarities between the vectors of violence and the individual embeddings of
17
all articles published between 1956 and 1989.
As shown in Figure 2, the 34 years in question are characterized by cycles of
“repression and relaxation” (He), the graph bearing witness to PRC society’s
painful journey through a series of movements, mobilizations, and purges.
We see a steady growth of violent language from 1956 all the way to the
Cultural Revolution beginning in 1966, and then a series of peaks in the years
that follow. The intra-party conflicts surrounding Deng Xiaoping’s “three
18
directives” (san xiang zhishi 三项指示) in the early months of 1976, the
protests in Tiananmen Square in April 1976, the Sino-Vietnamese conflict
(1979), and the June Fourth demonstrations in 1989 are also strongly marked
by violent discourse. On average, the 1980s are charged with militaristic
language much less than the preceding decades. That the model can identify
the relevant periods in conformity with existing historiography is reassuring;
on the other hand, the fact that both the years of 1976 and 1979 are marked

16 The semantic content of each article labeled “violent” was transformed into a 768-dimensional vector representation by accessing the [CLS]

special token in the top layer of the pre-trained Chinese BERT model (bert-base-chinese, 110M parameters). Prior to generating the
embeddings, the model has been fine-tuned for one epoch on a binary classification task (violent/non-violent). By taking an average of all
such representations (embeddings), we arrived at a single vector of violence, which, in theory, could be used to quantify how violent a given
text is: the higher the similarity between this violence prototype and the vector representation of some other text, the more violent the text.
Since violence appears in many forms and shapes, however, such an approach would necessarily lose nuance. We adopted the multiple
prototypes approach, clustering similar embeddings with the help of elbow method and using the centroids of these clusters as
representative vectors (prototypes) for each cluster.
17 For each article, we calculated the cosine similarities between its vector representation and the violence prototypes, selecting only the highest

score, which then contributed to the average violence for any given month. We averaged the vector representations for each article longer
than 510 characters (the maximum input for bert-base-chinese, with two special characters added by the tokenizer).
18 While couched in Marxist-Leninist terms, the so-called “three directives” was a set of policy guidelines launched by Deng Xiaoping in May

1975 to steer the country away from the ideology of class struggle in the interest of economic modernization.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

Figure 2. Monthly average of cosine similarities between the vector representations of PLA Daily’s articles and the
vectors of violence.

with violent sentiments on a par with, and at times exceeding, the intensity of
the Cultural Revolution has been rarely acknowledged in literature and calls
for further research.
We decided to probe further behind this familiar narrative. Although two
texts produced at different times might be equally violent according to their
placement in the vector space, the violent charge might be in fact distributed
unevenly among different themes. In the next step, we took inspiration from
topic modeling, a text mining technique which considers a text or a set of
texts as an assemblage of discourses, each of which is essentially a group
of words that tend to occur together. As such, topic modeling is a way of
partitioning the textual space and aligns with the distributional perspectives
of Rancière and Agamben. We used the MALLET implementation of LDA
(Latent Dirichlet Allocation) to train a topic model on the selected preprocessed PLA Daily articles (150,988 documents containing 60,029,332
words in total), with 200 topics, 1,500 iterations, and default
19
hyperparameters. After training, we calculated the contribution of each

19 The pre-processing involved removing Chinese stopwords and monosyllabic words from the corpus and selecting only articles containing at

least 100 words. For topic modeling, we did not split the articles into smaller chunks as we considered each article as a thematically-coherent
entity.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

Figure 3. Temporal analysis of violence-related language by topic (1956-1989). The color intensity in each cell indicates
the weighted average violence score of a specific topic for a particular month, normalized against the total presence of
the given topic in the given month. Only selected topics are displayed.

topic to the total amount of violence illustrated in the previous figure. The
color intensity in each cell of the resulting heatmap (Figure 3) signifies the
20
weighted average violence score of a specific topic for a particular month.

20 The violence score was derived by multiplying the topic’s presence in each article with the corresponding cosine similarity calculated

beforehand (see notes 16 and 17), leading to the aggregate weighted scores for each topic and month. The scores were then normalized using
the total topic presence in each month. The normalization assures that the high presence of a topic in many non-violent articles does not by
itself lead to a high weighted average. In other words, the topic must be present in highly violent texts to contribute significantly. Only the
top three terms for each topic are shown.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

Table 2. Examples of high-violence, mid-violence, and low-violence topics with the top 10 most representative terms.
High-Violence Topics
103

敌人 (“the enemy”), 战斗 (“combat”), 阵地 (“position”), 战士 (“warrior”), 高地 (“high ground”), 手榴弹 (“grenade”), 炮弹
(“shell”), 炮火 (“artillery fire”), 消灭 (“eliminate”), 同志 (“comrade”)

132

敌人 (“the enemy”), 武装 (“armed”), 人民 (“people”), 力量 (“power”), 解放 (“liberation”), 地区 (“area”), 军民 (“military and
civilians”), 敌军 (“enemy army”), 伪军 (“puppet army”), 进攻 (“attack”)
Mid-Violence Topics

87

印度 (“India”), 中国 (“China”), 政府 (“government”), 边界 (“border”), 巴基斯坦 (“Pakistan”), 领土 (“territory”), 尼赫鲁
(“Nehru”), 地区 (“area”), 进行 (“conduct”), 照会 (“inquiry”)

122

老挝 (“Laos”), 爱国 (“patriotic”), 泰国 (“Thailand"), 政府 (“government"), 日内瓦 (“Geneva”), 万象 (“Vientiane”), 战线党
(“Pathet Lao”), 民族 (“national”), 中立 (“neutral”), 集团 (“group”)
Low-Violence Topics

12

技术 (“technology”), 革新 (“innovation”), 成功 (“success”), 试验 (“test”), 设计 (“design”), 设备 (“equipment”), 提高 (“improve”),
创造 (“create”), 试制 (“trial production”), 制造 (“manufacture”)

155

全国 (“nationwide”), 中央 (“central”), 副主席 (“vice chairman”), 中共 (“Communist Party of China”), 委员 (“member”), 政协
(“Political Consultative Conference”), 代表 (“representative”), 今天 (“today”), 人民 (“people”), 委员会 (“committee”)

Our visualization demonstrates that violence, represented as a single line
in Figure 2, is in fact a distribution across different topics and different
time scales. Most prominent are themes with long-standing connection to
violence, which can be recognized in the graph as long, horizontal stripes
of red and black. Such themes converge around general terms related to
war making (topic 15), strategic and combative activities (197), military
equipment and exercises (15, 103, 191), as well as ideological and political
conflicts (194). The space of violence is also claimed by more ephemeral,
semi-violent topics, such as the Vietnam War (61) and the Arab-Israeli (137)
conflicts. During the mid-phase of the Cultural Revolution (1968-1973), one
observes a surge in violent discourse revolving around armed confrontations
in Laos, Indonesia, Cambodia, the Korean peninsula, India, Latin America,
Western Europe, and the Eastern Bloc. Violence is redistributed by attaching
militaristic descriptions to the international and global themes and removing
such vocabulary from the more local ones (12, 22, 57, 155, 171, 172,
177). Such a pattern of distribution might indicate a strategic redirection
of narrative focus: by highlighting international conflicts and lessening the
emphasis on internal strife, the PLA Daily portrays the internal revolutionary
discourse as being under the protective and guiding hand of the military
leadership. The consistent violent associations with terms like “the People”
and “the enemy,” by contrast, reinforce the notion of external threats and
further validate the need for a unified internal front (Table 2).
Another important insight from Figure 3 is the totalization of violence
observable during the Cultural Revolution, as nearly all topics detected by
the model become violent and contribute to the high overall score of that
period. This can be seen in the form of red vertical columns traversing the
entire graph. In such violent circumstances, virtually anything that can be
talked or even thought about acquires violent connotations and becomes
surrounded with violent vocabulary. While apparently in agreement with the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

Maoist paradigm of “continuous revolution,” this all-encompassing upsurge
in violence paradoxically reflected the CCP leadership’s decreasing ability to
control how violence was distributed (Ji 139–50).

Internationalization of violent discourse during the Cultural
Revolution
The expediency of the attention shift away from the local developments
towards the international stage has not been sufficiently emphasized by
scholars. It has been often assumed that from its very inception the CCP was
“internationalist in premise and in promise” (Kirby 874), in accordance with
the Marxist-Maoist ideology and the CCP’s push for “Eastern revolution”
meant to redefine the rules of international relations (Dirlik; Levenson 1–18;
Volland 9–15; B. Wang, “Art”). As noted by Jian Chen (11), however,
“revolutionary foreign policy helped to make Mao’s various state and societal
transformation programs powerful unifying and national themes supplanting
many local, regional, or factional concerns.” The idealized accounts of
socialist internationalism as a “global struggle against capital” (Tyerman 7,
36) and an attempt to build “a socialist world economy stretching from
Berlin to Canton” (Kirby 870) frequently overlook the pragmatic aspects
of internationalist imagination. We suggest that in addition to its welldocumented role in furthering domestic mobilization, internationalism
served also as a rhetorical-distributional move that pushed the images of
destabilizing violence towards remote lands located far from the center, not
unlike the more recent Wolf Warrior 2 imagery contrasting domestic safety
with overseas violence. This strategy was all the more important given that
China’s armed forces were increasingly beset by factionalism in the late 1960s,
the main line PLA forces and the local militia-driven PADs (People’s Armed
Departments, or renmin wuzhuang bu 人民武装部) finding themselves at
odds with each other (Guoqiang and Walder 5–6, 83; Dreyer 67–68).
For example, in mid-1967 an “unprincipled civil war” (Bridgham 18)
engulfed the PRC and the antagonism and hostility increased between the
PLA and the revolutionary left. Instead of supporting army commanders,
revolutionary mass organizations in the provinces and major cities violently
attacked local military control committees. On May 7, Mao launched an
intensive rectification campaign within the army; clashes between rival
factions disrupted several major rail lines, and the Wuhan Incident unfolded
in mid-July, where the PLA-backed “Million Heroes” (bai wan xiongshi 百
万雄师) and the Red Guards-backed “Wuhan Workers” (gongren zongbu 工
人总部), both counting hundreds of thousands of members, engaged in an
intense propaganda war and military confrontations; Red Flag editorial on
July 31 fueled military sentiments, appealing to “bring down the capitalist
roaders” in the PLA. Large-scale conflicts occurred in Beijing, Chongqing,
Hangzhou, and other big cities (Thurston, “Urban Violence”). Such violent
circumstances at home seemed of little importance to the PLA Daily’s

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

editors, however. According to our model, some of the most violent articles
published between May and July 1967 focus on events happening far from
major PRC agglomerations, denouncing US imperialism and the Western
incursions into PRC territory. In the following years, there are also hundreds
of articles related to significant victories and developments in the military
engagements in Southeast Asia and Palestine:
“Following the teachings of our great leader Chairman Mao, we,
the young Red Guards, vow to be the strong backing for the
people of the three countries of Indochina, firmly supporting
the people of Cambodia and other Indochina countries in their
war of resistance against America to save their nations, firmly
supporting the American people in their revolutionary struggle
against the Nixon administration, and firmly supporting the
righteous struggle of the people all over the world against
American imperialism!” (“Chairman Mao’s Solemn Declaration
is the Highest Order to the Red Guards,” PLA Daily, No. 5-22,
1970).
Such internationalist coverage was disconnected from the developments
within the PRC, however, where local, unofficial outlets brimmed with
uncompromising denunciations of opposing factions. Writing about the
revolution in Chongqing, Guobin Yang in his Red Guard Generation notes
that “factional battles were intense and deadly in many places, […] involving
the use of rifles, heavy artillery, and even tanks and military battleships” (41).
The rebels would seize machinery factories to produce makeshift weapons
and vehicles and then deploy them against their enemies. Across the country,
different military groupings engaged in public accusations of their opponents
and commemorated their own dead through public memorial services and
newspaper pages devoted to the martyrs (Ji 180–218). Condemning the
cruelty of their enemies, Red Guards would intersperse violent accounts of
battles with Mao’s quotations, vying to prove their revolutionary credentials.
The violence typical of such texts, however, comes from a completely
different distribution than the one that characterizes official publications such
as the PLA Daily.
Thus, while propagating an anti-colonial ethos and championing global
justice, the official narratives published in the PLA Daily simultaneously
served an important rhetorical purpose at odds with the happenings inside
the country. A computational analysis which allows for the observation of
shifts in the topical distribution of violence over time makes such narrative
strategies more easily identifiable when combined with traditional
historiographical approaches.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

Conclusion
In this article, we use quantification as an exploratory and conceptual tool;
not to arrive at a final conclusion as to which day and which hour in modern
China’s history was most violent, but rather to suggest a distributional way
of thinking about state violence and its legitimation. Quantitative approaches
to texts such as the PLA Daily offer unique perspectives on the distribution
of violence as a way of legitimizing distinct forms, agents, and targets of state
power. We show how the three different soldier vectors: junren, zhanshi, and
minbing acquired political legitimacy to engage in violence on behalf of the
People: whereas the junren in the 1950s conveyed a focus on professional
violence, it was relegated to a secondary role by the romanticized zhanshi
during the Cultural Revolution, only to regain prominence after Mao
Zedong’s death and the rise of new nationalism in China. Minbing, on the
other hand, vacillated precariously between the two in an uneasy relationship
with the regular armed forces. In addition to tracing such changes
genealogically, we also show that violence in the PLA Daily has been
distributed hierarchically: the “people vs. the People” narrative concentrated
military sentiment throughout the analyzed period, whereas international
topics manifested only intermittently. The selective reportage in the PLA
Daily during the Cultural Revolution was not merely a reflection of global
events but a distributional maneuver to shape domestic perceptions. Further
big data research is necessary to examine similar narrative strategies in other
sources.
Peer reviewers: Marilyn Levin, Henrike Rudolph
Dataverse repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/DLKIAC
Submitted: January 08, 2024 EDT, Accepted: February 08, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

works cited
Agamben, Giorgio. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Translated by Daniel HellerRoazen, Stanford University Press, 1998.
Algee-Hewitt, Mark, et al. “Representing Race and Ethnicity in American Fiction, 1789-1920.”
Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 5, no. 2, 2020, pp. 28–60, https://doi.org/10.22148/
001c.18509.
Bridgham, Philip. “Mao’s Cultural Revolution in 1967: The Struggle to Seize Power.” The China
Quarterly, vol. 34, June 1968, pp. 6–37, https://doi.org/10.1017/s0305741000014417.
Chen, Xiaomei. “Worker-Peasant-Soldier Literature.” Words and Their Stories, edited by Ban Wang,
Brill, 2010, pp. 65–83, https://doi.org/10.1163/ej.9789004188600.i-342.22.
Diamant, Neil J. Embattled Glory: Veterans, Military Families, and the Politics of Patriotism in
China, 1949-2007. Reprint edition, Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2010, https://doi.org/
10.5771/9780742557680.
Dirlik, Arif. The Origins of Chinese Communism. Oxford University Press, 1989.
Dittmer, Lowell. “Bases of Power in Chinese Politics: A Theory and an Analysis of the Fall of the
‘Gang of Four.’” World Politics, vol. 31, no. 1, 1978, pp. 26–60, https://doi.org/10.2307/
2009966.
Dreyer, June Teufel. “The Chinese Militia: Citizen-Soldiers and Civil-Military Relations in the
People’s Republic of China.” Armed Forces & Society, vol. 9, no. 1, 1982, pp. 63–82,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0095327x8200900105.
Edwards, Louise. “Military Celebrity in China: The Evolution of ‘Heroic and Model Servicemen.’”
Celebrity in China, edited by Louise Edwards and Elaine Jeffreys, Hong Kong University Press,
2010, pp. 21–44, https://doi.org/10.5790/hongkong/9789622090873.003.0002.
Ganesan, Narayanan, and Sung Chull Kim. State Violence in East Asia. University Press of
Kentucky, 2013.
Gittings, John. “China’s Militia.” The China Quarterly, no. 18, 1964, pp. 100–17, https://doi.org/
10.1017/s0305741000041904.
---. The Role of the Chinese Army. Royal Institute of International Affairs, Oxford University Press,
1967.
Gu, Yizhong. The Myth of Voluntary Death: The Representation of Sacrifice and Martyrdom in the
Maoist Films (1949-1976). 2017. Thesis. digital.lib.washington.edu,
https://digital.lib.washington.edu:443/researchworks/handle/1773/40007.
Guoqiang, Dong, and Andrew G. Walder. A Decade of Upheaval: The Cultural Revolution in Rural
China. Princeton University Press, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1515/9780691214979.
He, Henry Yuhuai. Cycles of Repression and Relaxation: Politico-Literary Events in China,
1976–1989. N. Brockmeyer, 1992.
Hung, Chang-tai. Mao’s New World: Political Culture in the Early People’s Republic. Cornell
University Press, 2011.
Ji, Fengyuan. Linguistic Engineering: Language and Politics in Mao’s China. University of Hawaii
Press, 2003.
Jian, Chen. Mao’s China and the Cold War. University of North Carolina Press, 2001.
Kirby, William C. “China’s Internationalization in the Early People’s Republic: Dreams of a
Socialist World Economy.” The China Quarterly, no. 188, 2006, pp. 870–90, https://doi.org/
10.1017/s0305741006000476.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

LaRocca, Andrew. A Dangerous Game: China’s State Media Perceptions of Strategic Competition
with the United States. 2023. M.A. Dissertation. Stanford Digital Repository,
https://purl.stanford.edu/cb005fs3386.
Lary, Diana. China’s Civil War: A Social History, 1945–1949. Reissue edition, Cambridge
University Press, 2015, https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9781107294417.
Lee, Haiyan. Revolution of the Heart: A Genealogy of Love in China, 1900-1950. Stanford University
Press, 2007, https://doi.org/10.1515/9780804768078.
---. “The Charisma of Power and the Military Sublime in Tiananmen Square.” The Journal of Asian
Studies, vol. 70, no. 2, 2011, pp. 397–424, https://doi.org/10.1017/s0021911811000040.
---. “The Soft Power of the Constant Soldier: Or, Why We Should Stop Worrying and Learn to
Love the PLA.” Chinese Visions of World Order, edited by Ban Wang, Duke University Press,
2017, pp. 237–66.
Levenson, Joseph. Revolution and Cosmopolitanism: The Western Stage and the Chinese Stages. 1st
ed., University of California Press, 2018.
Li, Xiaobing. A History of the Modern Chinese Army. University Press of Kentucky, 2007,
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt2jcq4k.
Lo, Winston W. “The Self-Image of the Chinese Military in Historical Perspective.” Journal of
Asian History, vol. 31, no. 1, 1997, pp. 1–24.
Lu, Hong 盧弘. Junbao Neibu Xiaoxi: “Wenge” Qinli Shilu [The Inside Story of PLA Daily]. Shidai
guoji chuban youxian gongsi, 2006.
Luo, Zhifan. “Politicalization or Professionalism? A Case Study of the Military’s Discourse in
China.” Armed Forces & Society, vol. 48, no. 1, 2022, pp. 185–204, https://doi.org/10.1177/
0095327x20906848.
McCord, Edward A. “Militia in Modern China: Lessons for Contemporary Conflicts.” American
Journal of Chinese Studies, vol. 15, no. 2, 2008, pp. 123–36.
Mittler, Barbara. A Continuous Revolution: Making Sense of Cultural Revolution Culture. Harvard
University Press, 2013.
Owen, Stephen. An Anthology of Chinese Literature: Beginnings to 1911. W. W. Norton, 1996.
Panagia, Davide. “‘Partage Du Sensible’: The Distribution of the Sensible.” Jacques Rancière: Key
Concepts, edited by Jean-Phillipe Deranty, Cambridge University Press, 2010, pp. 95–103,
https://doi.org/10.1017/upo9781844654727.008.
Pang, Laikwan. The Art of Cloning: Creative Production During China’s Cultural Revolution. Verso
Books, 2017.
Perry, Elizabeth. Anyuan: Mining China’s Revolutionary Tradition. University of California Press,
2012, https://doi.org/10.1525/9780520954038.
Powell, Ralph L. “Everyone a Soldier: The Communist Chinese Militia.” Foreign Affairs, vol. 39,
no. 1, 1960, pp. 100–11, https://doi.org/10.2307/20029468.
Rancière, Jacques. The Politics Of Aesthetics: The Distribution of the Sensible. Bloomsbury Academic,
2013, https://doi.org/10.5040/9781350284913.
Schmitt, Carl. Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty. Translated by George
Schwab, University of Chicago Press, 2006, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/
9780226738901.001.0001.
Shambaugh, David. “China’s Military in Transition: Politics, Professionalism, Procurement and
Power Projection.” The China Quarterly, no. 146, 1996, pp. 265–98, https://doi.org/10.1017/
s0305741000045033.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Vectors of Violence: Legitimation and Distribution of State Power in the People’s Liberation Army Daily (Jiefangjun Bao), 1…

---. “The Soldier and the State in China: The Political Work System in the People’ Liberation
Army.” The China Quarterly, vol. 127, Sept. 1991, pp. 527–68, https://doi.org/10.1017/
s0305741000031052.
Thurston, Anne F. Enemies of the People: The Ordeal of the Intellectuals in China’s Great Cultural
Revolution. Harvard University Press, 1988.
---. “Urban Violence during the Cultural Revolution: Who Is to Blame?” Violence in China: Essays
in Culture and Counterculture, edited by Jonathan N. Lipman and Stevan Harrell, Harvard
University Press, 1990, pp. 149–74.
Tyerman, Edward. Internationalist Aesthetics: China and Early Soviet Culture. Columbia University
Press, 2021.
Vogel, Ezra F. “From Revolutionary to Semi-Bureaucrat: The ‘Regularisation’ of Cadres.” The
China Quarterly, no. 29, 1967, pp. 36–60, https://doi.org/10.1017/s0305741000047901.
Volland, Nicolai. Socialist Cosmopolitanism: The Chinese Literary Universe, 1945-1965. Columbia
University Press, 2017, https://doi.org/10.7312/voll18310.
Walder, Andrew G. China Under Mao: A Revolution Derailed. Harvard University Press, 2017.
Wang, Ban. “Art, Politics, and Internationalism in Korean War Films.” China in the World: Culture,
Politics, and World Vision, Duke University Press, 2022, pp. 80–100, https://doi.org/10.1215/
9781478092452-005.
---. The Sublime Figure of History: Aesthetics and Politics in Twentieth-Century China. Stanford
University Press, 1997.
Wang, James C. F. “The Urban Militia as a Political Instrument in the Power Contest in China in
1976.” Asian Survey, vol. 18, no. 6, 1978, pp. 541–59, https://doi.org/10.2307/2643225.
Wang, Juntao, and Anne-Marie Brady. “Sword and Pen: The Propaganda System of the People’s
Liberation Army.” China’s Thought Management, edited by Anna-Marie Brady, 2012, pp.
122–45.
Weber, Max. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. Oxford University Press, 1946.
Woloch, Alex. The One vs. the Many: Minor Characters and the Space of the Protagonist in the
Novel. Princeton University Press, 2004, https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400825752.
Wu, Ting-Jun, and Pin-Lian Yu. “Media, Environment of Quotations, Cult of Personality:
Research Based on People’s Liberation Army Daily (1960-1969).” Mass Communication
Research, no. 127, 2016, pp. 39–73.
Xu, Yan. The Soldier Image and State-Building in Modern China, 1924-1945. University Press of
Kentucky, 2019, https://doi.org/10.5810/kentucky/9780813176741.001.0001.
Xun, Zhou. “Violence in Revolutionary China, 1949–1963.” The Cambridge World History of
Violence: Volume 4: 1800 to the Present, edited by Jay Winter et al., vol. 4, Cambridge University
Press, 2020, pp. 408–26. Cambridge University Press, https://doi.org/10.1017/
9781316585023.021.
Yang, Guobin. The Red Guard Generation and Political Activism in China. Columbia University
Press, 2016, https://doi.org/10.7312/columbia/9780231149648.001.0001.
Zhang, Chi 张弛. “‘Jiefangjun Bao’ Chuangkan Chuqi de Bianweihui [The Editorial Board at the
Inception of the ’People’s Liberation Army Daily’].” Junshi Jizhe, no. 5, 2019, pp. 65–67.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

