Mohamed, Eid, and Talaat F. Mohamed. “Racio-National Imaginary and Discursive
Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modeling
Study.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 3, June 2024,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116223.

ARTICLE

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic
Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modeling Study
Eid Mohamed1, Talaat F Mohamed2,3
1 Qatar University, 2 Al Azhar University, 3 Egypt and Jouf University, KSA

Keywords: al-Manār, al-Risālah, Arab Identity, Racial Identity, Arab Nahḍah, Islamic Identity
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116223

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 3, 2024

This article focuses on the dynamics of culture, language, and race as integral to
the discourse on Pan-Islamist/Pan-Arabist national identification in Egypt
during an era of drastic change in the Egyptian political and social spheres that
set the stage for the current century that followed. Our approach draws on
computational tool of topic modeling to probe relevant thematic discussions on
the” conceptualization of race, language, culture, and identity by leading ArabMuslim intelligentsia at a foundational moment that paved the way for Arab
Nahḍah (modernity). Specifically, this analysis is meant to trace the intellectual
development in the writings of Muḥammad Rashid Riḍā’s (1865-1935), which
appeared in the magazine he edited, al-Manār (‘The Lighthouse’, 1898-1935),
and those of Aḥmad Ḥasan al-Zayyāt’s (1885-1968), editor of al-Risālah (`The
Messageʼ, 1933-1953), also a weekly magazine, both published in Cairo, Egypt.
The study concludes that both figures sought to galvanize a largely hybridized
Islamist/Arabist discourse as manifested in the clusteral paradigms of modelled
topics.

This article focuses on the dynamics of culture, language, and race as integral
to the discourse on Pan-Islamist/Pan-Arabist national identification in Egypt
during an era of drastic change in the Egyptian political and social spheres
that set the stage for the current century that followed. Our approach draws
on computational analysis or topic modeling to probe relevant thematic
discussions on the conceptualization of race, language, culture, and identity
by leading Arab-Muslim intelligentsia at a foundational moment that paved
the way for Arab Nahḍah ('modernityʼ). Specifically, this analysis is meant
to trace the intellectual development in the writings of Muḥammad Rashid
Riḍā’s (1865-1935), which appeared in the magazine he edited, al-Manār
('The Lighthouseʼ, 1898-1935), and those of Aḥmad Ḥasan al-Zayyāt’s
(1885-1968), editor of al-Risālah ('The Messageʼ, 1933-1953), also a weekly
1
magazine, both published in Cairo, Egypt. The study concludes that both
figures sought to galvanize a largely hybridized Islamist/Arabist discourse as
manifested in the clusteral paradigms of modeled topics.

1 The two magazines were individual initiatives that stopped with the passing of their owners and main editors.

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Our investigative approach to the politics of identity and other modalities,
including religion, culture, and ethnicity, builds on a blending, or – to
borrow from Andrew Piper – “integration” (“Novel Devotions” 69) of
distant and close readings of the paradigmatic shifts in the identity politics
discourses in the two magazines. We make use of Franco Moretti distant
reading (2005), which is a facet of the digital turn in the humanities, in
exploring the entire corpora of the two magazines, while our “close reading”
draws mainly on the articles written by the two editors-in-chief, who are the
main contributors to the two magazines. Our visualizing-steered approach is
meant to sustain traditional close reading with the abstract view offered by
the graphs of topics modeled and in turn probe the paradigmatic shifts in the
discourse of Arab/Islamic identity as introduced in the two magazines. This
digitally-aided close reading aims at a better understanding of the underlying
parameters of identity discourse during a critical juncture in the history of
Arab literary/cultural journalism and Arab cultural history in general.
Contextually, numerous studies discussed the application of topic modeling
to Arabic corpora to enhance topic detection and clustering (Rafea and
GabAllah 2018). Researchers like Francesca Fallucchi et al. (2022), for
example, discuss how both quantitative and qualitative research methods in
the humanities can be enriched through the use of the functionalities and
tools offered by digital humanities in Arabic, though they focus mainly on the
2
Edumeres Toolbox as applied to Arabic textbooks. This enriching potential
features prominently in Till Grallert’s study of the periodical press during in
late Ottoman Eastern Mediterranean, with a focus on four Arabic magazines
that included al-Manār. In his article, Grallert proposes a systemic study
of journalistic production during the pre-Nahda period as a “formative”
discursive field that still has bearings on the cultural and intellectual life in the
Arabic-speaking Middle East. However, his study addresses the question of
authorship and the inter-journalistic network, using “social network analysis
and stylometry for authorship attribution” (Grallert 61). In a more recent
study, “Do Egyptians Still Care About the Arab Spring?” (2024), topic
modeling is used in the classification of journalistic topics in post-Arab
Spring Egypt where the modelling step provides a deeper and richer
understanding of the relationships and patterns in the corpus. It shows how
modelling process enables researchers to gain insights into the cultural, social,
and historical contexts of the studied texts.
Methodologically, we use morphological processing and topic modeling of alManār and al-Risālah corpora to investigate topical (thematic) concurrences
associated with the identity discourse in the Arab-Muslim world in both
magazines. This qualitative mapping (and graphing) is coupled with a

2 ^Utilizing computer-

assisted analysis techniques derived from computational linguistics and computer science to explore and compare extensive text corpora to id
entify recurring patterns^ ^or dominant topics.^

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

quantitative, close reading of selected articles, by the editors-in-chief, that
directly address the respective topics explored in this study. This hybrid
approach, besides enhancing our understanding of the engaged topics, helps
in unraveling the underlying discursive patterns and their fluctuations across
the span of the two magazines’ lifespans, and of course apart from the
controversy of the pros and cons, or – to borrow from Elizabeth Callaway
et al. (2020) – the “push and pull” of digital humanities. So, based on
established traditional readings of the selected topics, we revisit the corpora,
contextualize modeled topics, and search for new insights by drawing on the
abstract views resulting from such modeling. Here, clustering words together
under topic modeling allows us to pinpoint the word network recurring
under each theme and track thematic variations and frequency rates over the
publishing spans of the two magazines.

Methodology
The data used in this study comes from the Shamela versions of al-Manār
(https://old.shamela.ws/index.php/book/6947)
and
al-Risālah
(https://old.shamela.ws/index.php/book/29674). The two xhtml text files
of the two magazines, which already have a clean and simple navigation
structure, were extracted using the Python library, BeautifulSoup, removing
the boilerplate and the markup tags. This resulted in 3980 text files and
6.740.567 words from al-Manār and 13755 text files and 15,228,812 words
from al-Risālah. The texts are organized chronologically so that we can track
the respective topics and also quantitatively measure the frequency of clusters
(word networks) across the lifespan of the magazines. Although the digital
versions of the two journals are searchable, it is not possible to analyze the
large amount of available data or extract thematic evidence without the help
of topic modeling, as the digital versions only allow for keyword searches.
Drawing on distributional semantics, topic modeling the two magazines’
datasets offers us paradigmatic insight into the key themes or clusters that
can nuance our traditional close readings of these related themes. Due to
the special richness of Arabic morphology, preprocessing is applied through
morphological stemming, in which prefixes and suffixes are dropped, and
then conjunctions are dismissed in topic models, using root forms only.
In preparation for processing, sentence boundaries are detected heuristically,
and then morphological segmentation is conducted. The topic models are
then built through stems produced by the Arabic-SOS tools, where the
Gradient Boosting Machine Learning algorithm is used for word
segmentation, resulting in an accuracy rate of 98.8%. Next, the Mallet topic
modeling toolkit (Mohamed and Sayyed 2019) within these models, topical
words, having maximally higher frequency rates than others, are taken to be
thematically correlating into clusters (themes). Through 50 and 100-topic
modeling, we get a thematic distribution map, where the high-probability
list co-concurrences (or near collocates) guide our close investigation of
Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Figure 1. Data Processing Phases

the distribution of such top words and reading of the selected texts to
see how the surfacing topics cohere into meaningful patterns. This close
reading is coupled with a metadata review to sustain a consistent reading of
the topics discussed. With close reading focusing eclectically on the articles
written by the editors-in-chief of the two magazines and the topic modeling
process results, we compare and contrast the progress line of the selected
themes that sustain the identity formation discourse to identify elements or
convergence and divergence in both magazines and thus see how the digitalmanual synergy can help in giving new insights about major sociocultural
preoccupations during a foundational period in the history of Arab culture.
Such preoccupations will be contextualized in the following sections.

Arab Racio-national Imaginary: Critical Context
According to the Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci (1891–937), hegemony
is not just the dominance of one class over the other(s) but also necessitates
the consent of the lower class(es). In his later writings, Gramsci explains that
hegemony is not merely rooted in economism but is a matter of political and
cultural dominance as well. We would have to agree with Gramsci's theory
of hegemony because the modes of hegemony, dominance, and control that
we observe in the early 20th century Arab World do not merely dominate in
the realm of state politics, but practically dominate over a majority, if not all
aspects of life. However, it is through struggle and human agency that we can
overcome hegemony.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

We use the above theoretical framework in addressing the minorities in
the Arab world (specifically in Egypt), and the cultural and political
constructions of empire. We explore through computational tools the role of
the selected magazines in shaping the earlier discursive formations of identity
that still reverberate in the modern cultural and intellectual life in Egypt and
the Arab world.

Why al-Manār and al-Risālah
During the pre-Nahḍah period (roughly mid-19th to early 20th cen.),
magazines were the locomotives of cultural transformation and
enlightenment in an Arab world that was suffering both vicious colonialism
and oppressive monarchy. These magazines induced dynamism in a largely
stagnating Arabo-Islamic world. They also served as a platform, not only
for interreligious dialogues, debates, and disputes but also for an eclectic
translational process of world literature. No wonder major intellectuals of the
time contributed to these magazines, adding to their lively and innovative
discussions. Both al-Manār and then al-Risālah played a key role in
reflecting the spirit of their age and in invigorating the cultural sphere in
Egypt and, by extension, in the rest of the Arabo-Islamic world, given their
circulation outside Egypt.
3

Scope
Based on the foregoing, this article investigates the multifaceted identity
discourse as represented in the journals through racial, religious and cultural
debates. These key constituents of identity largely shape and are also shaped
by the prevalent nationalist narratives in Egypt during the lifespan of the
two journals. And, since language itself is a key constituent in the racial
discourse on Arab, Christian-(Coptic)-Jewish relations, topic modeling has
helped us in tracing the main associations or collocates surrounding the topic
and identifying its conceptual molding.

From Pan-Islamism to Pan-Arabism
Both al-Manār and al-Risālah represent pivotal links in the shift from PanIslamism to Pan-Arab nationalism within the discourse of Arabo-Islamic
identity in Egypt, and the rest of the Arab world, during the pre(modern)
period. While the focus of al-Manār was on religious issues, especially the
relationship between Muslims and Copts (Christians) and later Muslims and
Copts against Jews, with the rise of the Palestinian Question, both al-Manār
and al-Risālah had a deep nationalist thread within that sweeping religious
current.

3 For a broader contextualization of the term, see Hannah Scott Deuchar, ‘“Nahḍa”: Mapping a Keyword in Cultural Discourse’, Alif: Journal

of Comparative Poetics 37 (2017): 50–84.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Figure 2. Cluster network in al-Manār, with an illustration of relevant head clusters

Figure 3. Graphic representation of Clusters 11, 15, and 40.

Based on an analytical inspection of the high frequency themes in al-Manār
throughout its publication years, the following cluster-network chart
indicates a steady mention of the religious, followed only by a parallel, though
less frequent, discourse on Egyptian national discourse that involves largely
political reform. The leading clusters 15, 11, and 40, into which all other
subclusters channel, are shown in (Figure 1).
These three clusters roughly reflect the dominance of the religious (clusters 40
and 15) in the magazine, with a bent towards the religio-national, as reflected
in cluster 11. The line graph shows a considerable rise in cluster frequency
between 1916 and 1917, corresponding to the 1916 Great Arab Revolt led by
Sharif Hussein ibn 'Ali against the Ottoman Empire.
And while cluster 40 engages exegesis of the Qurʼan, based on the conclusive
scriptural evidence and genuine Sunnah ('Prophetic Traditionsʼ), cluster 15
reflects a binary religious discourse through which Islam and Christianity
Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

are weighed against one another, in terms of the creed itself, and with a
focus on the notion of monotheism as compared to the Christian Trinity.
Yet, by following the idea of his mentor, Muḥammad ‘Abduh, Riḍā believed
that Egypt as a nation was not ready for self-sovereignty, needing “gradual
training in the arts of rule” (Hourani, Arabic Thought 137). Riḍā first
advocated socio-religious reform in a then-declining Ottoman Caliphate in
the face of vicious European imperialism. However, he lost all hope in this
proto-Ottoman Islamism with the rise of the Unionists’ Pan-Turanism and
Ataturk’s abolition of the Caliphate. He dubbed the abolition as a social,
religious, and political coup (Riḍā, “al-Inqilāb” 273), and admitted that
Islamic rule is “closer to Republicanism than to absolute monarchy” (Riḍā,
“Manāfi” 279). In Riḍā’s opinion, unmarred belief in Islamic monotheism
and proper understanding of sound governance, based on consultation
(Shūra), were entwined in sustaining both religious and secular progress
for the Muslim nation. In 1907, he believed that the Egyptians, like the
Europeans, were much better than the Turks, as the former enjoyed a
free press while the Turks were still suffering the bloody consequences of
censorship. He attributed the Arabo-Muslim backwardness and despotism in
his time to misunderstanding of or deviation from the pristine tenets of Islam
and to the fact that the Arabs had learned the values of freedom and justice
largely through mingling with the Europeans.
Figures 2 and 3, where a plummeting cluster 11 is met with a rising trend in
clusters 15 and 40, underline the shifts in Riḍāʼs revivalist/reformist course,
showing that his reformism flourished under the influence of his two masters,
'Abdu and al-Afghānī (climaxing at the close of the 19th century), and then
receded in the 1930s in favor of a spiking revivalist Salafism, when ChristoIslamic binarism resurfaced. This religious binarism is also reflected in Riḍā’s
discourse on the Jews. Here, we will compare the attitude towards the Jews as
a racial other in both al-Manār and al-Risālah, but only after introducing a
brief outline of how the Jews have been represented in Arab-Islamic history.

Race and Racism in al-Manār and al-Risālah
As will be explained later, the terms 'raceʼ and 'racismʼ witness high frequency
in both magazines during times of crises and transition (as reflected in clusters
38 (weighted 0.03777) and 66 (weighted 0.04149) in al-Manār and cluster
65 (weighted 0.02803) in al-Risāla), knowing that, just like chauvinism,
racism itself is a shifting social construct that is nevertheless integral to
the processes of identity formation with the purpose of modernizing Egypt
without abandoning its cultural heritage. Farah Antun’s conclusion of his
1904 novel gives a clear indication to the alternative of a failed negotiation,
that is decline (symbolized by the death of the two lovers due to their
superimposed separation due to their difference in religious affiliations,
Christianity and Judaism (Alwan 52–53).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

A spirit of tolerant coexistence among the followers of the three Abrahamic
religions was largely prevalent in Egypt up until the 19th century, thanks to
4
the established Islamic Dhimma concept. Such tolerance finds its roots in
the Prophet of Islam’s Charter of Medina concluded between the Muslims
and the Jews, where both parties constituted a single nation under which
all enjoyed equal rights and duties. For Alwan, awareness of anti-Jewish
prejudices and bigotry increased with the modernization process of the 19th
century and the expansion of European education. However, the major
shift in the relations between both the Muslims and the Christians, on one
hand, and the Jews, on the other, came with the 1948 Jewish occupation
of Palestine. Then, pro-Jewish sentiments in Egyptian journals started to
recede while the ‘Jewish Question’ began to surface. It would be interesting,
however, to quickly skim the Jewish presence in Arabic literature from
its early stages. This developing discourse will therefore be traced in both
magazines under investigation.

Riḍā’s Developing Discourse on the Jews
Riḍā’s representation of the Jews in al-Manār can better be conceived
within the context of journalistic views of the Jews in Egypt during its
publishing span. The literature about the Jewish presence in Egypt was largely
marred with political tensions, in a discourse tinged with a nationalist hue,
especially during the 1940s and beyond. As early as 1902, he would speak
positively, not only about the Jews but also about the Zionists. Within
his discussion of the Jewish revival, Riḍā referred to the Jewish Zionist
Society, praising their financial and economic leverage, especially in France,
and inviting Arabs and Muslims to follow their suit in clinging to material
power as a source of prosperity (“Ḥayāt” 302). For Riḍā, the Jews maintained
their unity and power through adherence to their language and religion, and
through their economic mastery. He also believed that their power lay in their
formation of several societies (movements or denominations), including the
Zionist Society, which originated in Austria, Germany, England, and America
without the purpose of seizing Jerusalem as a seat of their authority. Riḍā’s
comparatist, emulative line of thought about the Jews, as illustrated through
the following graph (Figure 3), maintains that the shift from the religious to
the political was sparked only with the emergence of the Palestinian Question,
and preceded the organized Jewish Immigration and consequent JewishPalestinian clashes, followed by the Hebron Massacre (1929).
In Figure 4, the territorial precedes the religious and the focus is on the issue
of entitlement to a homeland in sacred Jerusalem. Here, the religious tone
seems to subside in favor of the territorially grounded political, as manifested
in the over-recurrence of territorial terms (signifiers). This perspective is

4 Covenanted non-Muslim minority (Jews or Christians) living in a Muslim majority country.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Figure 4. al-Manār cluster 38.

also sustained by Riḍā’s arguments against the then-attempted French
‘Christianization’ of the Berber, within his 1930s articles on the Berber
Question and the French attacks on Islam in al-Maghreb al-Aqṣā (the Farthest
5
Maghreb).
In Egypt, however, and because of the Israeli occupation of Palestine, the
Egyptian Jewry – who had formerly been overlooked or acknowledged as part
of the national fabric of the community – were caught between the Egyptian/
Israeli binary, where ethnic, religious, and identarian nuances were at full
play. So, the periods in which the Jews were singled out as ‘fifth column’
traitors to the country and the nations were those during the critical junctures
of the Palestinian Question, either during the 1947 UN Partition Plan for
Palestine or the 1948 war. This surging sentiment of hostility towards the
Jews was largely trigged by “Zionist policy in Palestine, and it is a hostility
that has affected even the Oriental Jews who are not Zionists” (Hourani,
Minorities 35). Among the prevalent narratives about the Jews was that they
were fully entitled citizens whose Jewishness prevailed over their Arabness.
Another narrative, however, was that they were colonialists in disguise or
– to borrow Fanon’s phrase with a slight twist, ‘Arab skins with Jewish
masks’ – a narrative that was outweighed during the times of crises. That very
narrative ran through both al-Manār and al-Risālah consistently (see Kamel
2006). The Jewish-Arab crises during this period include the emergence of
Sir Moses Montefiore and his massive support of Zionism (the 1840s), the
role of Sephardic Jews in Egypt under the protection of British Capitulations,

5 Riḍā vehemently denounced France’s attempts to exclude the Berber from the bounds of Islam. Comparing such Christianization attempts

to the British attempts to Judaize Palestinian Arabs, he insisted that the Berber are part of the Arab-Muslim territory and culture through
their belief in Islam and adoption of Arabic as their official language. See “Iṣrār” (309).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

the Jewish role in robbing the state in the 1870s by lending Khedive Ismail
a wealth that dragged Egypt into a swamp of debts and thus led to British
and French intervention, the Zionist Congress in Basel (1897), and the
economic leverage that allowed the Jews to have Jewish ministers in the 1920s.
These junctures, and others, reflect the fluctuating recurrence rates of Jewish
mention in al-Manār.
Given that the magazine’s objective, in Riḍā’s words, was to induce reform
in a stagnating Arab world at the time (“Fātiḥat al-Sanah al-Ūlā” 9), its
treatment of racial discrimination as a threat to the nation’s unity was
largely balanced. The representation of Jews in al-Manār was tolerant, with
a prevailing tone of antisemitism/antiracism. This approach by the SyroLebanese owner and editor was remarkable, especially as Levantine Christian
writings about the Jews at that time were unfavorable, even hostile, in the
light of the Dreyfuss Affair (Haim 307–09). Instead, his frequent mentions
of the Jews in al-Manār allowed Riḍā to denounce European racial
discrimination against them (Hourani, Minorities 18). The Jews, who
embraced the Arabic language, were relatively integrated into the larger
Muslim community, and were even “Islamized in their social life and popular
ethics” (18).
Riḍāʼs magazine did not buy the anti-Jewish racialism then prevalent in
Europe. In 1898, he addressed the issue of the Jews in France and in
Egypt — in particular, that the Dreyfuss Affair demonstrated a 'racistʼ, not
religious, foundation to the prosecution of Jews (“al-Yahūd fī Faransā” 54).
Riḍā also condemned similar anti-Jewish attitudes assumed by some Egyptian
magazines, stating “we believe public freedom is not limited to a certain
party to the exclusion of another. Rather proper civility and genuine fairness
dictate absolute equality among all humans in terms of public utilities” (53).
Here, Riḍā insisted on a conciliatory approach, prioritizing commonalities
within the bounds of the one nation, concluding with a call to “fellow
easterners” to learn from the Jewish case in France.
In 1901, Riḍā would highlight the fallacies or misconceptions about every
religion (“Shubuhāt” 379). He also noted that no followers of a specific
religion, Muslim or Christian, should promote misconceptions about
another religion. Still, he criticized the Christians for hurling false accusations
against Islam. In the same article, Riḍā argued against certain misconceptions
about the prophecies of Moses and Jesus, though noting that Judaism and
Christianity would be properly understood only when Islam was
acknowledged, since the evidence of the veracity of the two former religions
lay in the Qurʼan.
In 1902, Riḍā elaborated on the idolatrous origins of both the Torah and
the Bible (“Shubuhāt” 379), noting that the current versions of the Old
Testament were distorted. He stated that the true Torah referred to in the
Qur’an was the one containing Moses’ Commandments, as outlined in the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Figure 5. Al-Manār cluster 66.

Pentateuch. He stressed that the only way to salvation for the Jews was to
acknowledge the Muslim faith, though he admitted that even some eastern
Muslims, embracing European misconceptions about Islam, had abandoned
the religion altogether, just as Europeans had largely abandoned Christianity.
He added that “were it not for the Muslims’ misrepresentation of their
religion and the Westerners’ mistranslation of the Qur’an, all rational
Europeans would have embraced it” (380). In this sense, Riḍā was
differentiating between the pristine version of revealed Judaism and its
contemporary distorted version. Yet, during the heated debates about the
Jesuit missionaries, Riḍā found the Jews less excessive in their mammon
worship than the Jesuits. The spirited controversies between Riḍā and
Christian missionaries at the time and how Islamic-Christian religious
polemics eclipsed their Islamic-Jewish counterparts are reflected in the
prevalence of the religious thread over the national/political in Figure 4.
The two main clusters (38 and 66) reflect the frequent mention of Islamic/
Judaic themes in al-Manār. The topic modeling result shows that the
religious discussions of Judaism versus Islam prevail over the discussions of
the same theme from national and political perspectives. The first cluster
anchors key Judaic terms as part of the Islamic-Christian debates, with a
focus on the religious. Terms such as “Jews, Torah, the Pentateuch, the
Land of Israel, and Old Testament” entwine with Christian terms: “Messiah,
Bibles, Christians, Crucifixion, Jesus, Matthew, John, and Disciples.” Within
this cluster, the religious tone prevails over other political and national
threads. The second cluster, however, shows that the earlier religious tone
as subsuming and even morphing into nationalistic and political threads. So,

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

the national/territorial — “Palestine, Maghreb, France, Jerusalem, homeland,
Algeria, World, and land” — couples with the politico-religious — “Jews,
Arab, Zionist, French, and Berber, tribes and mosque.”
This braiding of the religious, the national/territorial and the politicoreligious reflects the intricacies of Jewish representation in al-Manār, and
the prevalence of the religious. The topical associations also reveal reciprocity
in the frequencies of the two different clusters. The graphic chart in Figure
5 shows parallel fluctuations in the two clusters throughout the magazine’s
publishing cycle. The early recurrence in the chart occurs in 1898, the time
the Dreyfus Affair found its way into the press, revealing anti-Jewish racism
among French “publishers coveting Jewish wealth” (“al-Yahūd” 53) in the
words of Riḍā himself, who was contrasting the status of the Jews both in
France and in Egypt. Interestingly, Riḍā in this article criticized not only the
French double-standard policy towards the Jews in the East and the West but
also prejudiced journalism in both France and Egypt, asking the Egyptians
— and the Easterners in general — to learn the anti-racism lessons from the
Dreyfuss Affair.
Although Riḍā clearly distinguished between the religious and the political
in the representation of the Jews, as indicated in Figures 4 and 5, the two
different topics show parallel fluctuations, falling and rising together almost
exactly, throughout in a way that hints at an unaddressed link between
the two. No doubt Riḍā himself, in his articles on Islam, Arabism, and
nationalism, maintained that these different designations were entwined
within the transcendent bond of Islam. Responding to a question on Islam’s
view of nationalism, Riḍā differentiated between chauvinistic national,
ethnic, or religious fanaticism and nationalism, asserting that Islam
denounces clannishness or blind partisanship in favor of a multi-ethnic,
multireligious bond within the single country, which by no means conflicted
with pan-Islamism or Islamic solidarity (“al-Waṭanīyah” 191). In this sense,
Riḍā seemed to be deriving from his precursor, al-Afghānī, who deemed
religious unity and national unity mutually reinforcing and even preferred
nationalism to pan-Islamism since the former – based on common language,
culture, and territory – would be more effective in establishing and sustaining
political power (see Kedourie 14–15). For Riḍā, this was a modern form of
solidarity that would be palatable, unlike Jahili (pre-Islamic) clannishness or
chauvinistic partisanship (“al-Waṭanīyah” 161). This view seemed to derive
largely from 'Abduh’s (and of course al-Afghānī's) rationalistic view of
religion and his advocacy for multireligious sociopolitical unity in the face of
a stagnant, superstitious, and dogmatic Islamism.
In the 1910s, Riḍā would maintain that both Arabs and Jews were Semites
and Easterners. Yet, those Jews became increasingly racist with the rise of
Zionism, whose objective was to “rally the Israeli people in Palestine and
make it a homeland for them exclusively” (“Al-Ṣihyūnīyah” 385).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Interestingly, Riḍā noted that the “Christian nations” in Europe used to
disparage the Jews “in the name of anti-Semitism,” in a way that united
all European Jews and eventually inspired them to “colonize Palestine” to
avoid European oppression (385). So, his solution was that the Arabs either
reconcile with the Zionist leaders or rally up, form associations or – if
absolutely necessary, in case peaceful solutions failed – “establish armed
militias to resist them by force” (“al-Masʼlatān” 319). Later on, and in the
wake of the Buraq Uprising (also known as the Wailing Wall riots) in 1929,
Riḍā lumped together the British occupation and the Jews as “opening the
door for sedition in Jerusalem and paving way for appropriation of the alAqṣā Mosque from the Muslims” (“Fatḥ al-Yahūd” 414). According to him,
the “great” American President Wilson, the Zionist Jews, and the Jewish
nation at large, were used as tools by the British in their imperialist enterprise
(414).
Riḍā’s discussion of Zionism and Jewish-Arab relations was only part of a
larger discourse on Islamic ‘Arabness’ as an umbrella identity. In 1917, he
maintained the bond between Islam and Arabism, that Islam promoted Arab
unity and that Arabo-Muslims had abandoned earlier forms of chauvinistic
partisanship in favor of the multi-racial, multi-national, and multireligious
nation. His call for Arab independence from a nominally Islamic Turkish
authority was only a countermove to a Turkish pan-Turanism, which for
him was a renewed form of chauvinistic racism. In this regard, he developed
the Salafiyya preached in al-Urwah al-Wuthqa (Arslan 127–28), adopting alAfghānī's utilitarianism in his reform project. This Salafiyya was his drive for
Arab nationalism (Al-Makhzumi 257), which was posited against Ottoman
Islam as well as military despotism and barbarism. Riḍā’s reform project built
on an inclusive multicultural, multireligious, and multiethnic vision in his
quest for a new normativity that lay beyond the rigidly traditional and the
neoliberally secular, in a “step on the path of revival” (Shahin ix-x).
Al-Zayyāt, on the other hand — and whose al-Risālah magazine (1933-1953)
was considered a milestone of Arab liberalism — took things a step further in
the reconciliatory project, developing a synthetic approach that braided Arab
and Western literary heritage with his own discourse of race, specifically in
relation to Judaism/Zionism/Fascism during the interwar period, all within
his umbrella discourse on Arab identity. His enterprise favored an ecumenical
approach to the Arab Nahḍah (Makdisi 110). In this sense, the emergence
of al-Risālah came as a natural representation of the spirit of the age in

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Egypt, with a focus on a new nationalistic trend rooted in collective Egyptian
6
identity and the Arabic language, in its literary and historical sense, rather
than in its religious sense (Esposito 62–63).
Riḍā’s pragmatic view of the rising secular nationalist bent as assimilative of
ethnic and religious diversity in the new nation-state, was developed by alZayyāt into a pro-Arabic, pro-Islamic, and pro-Eastern version. Like Riḍā’s,
al-Zayyāt’s version was antiracist, despite the temporary fluctuations under a
turbulent inter-war and post-war Egypt. His nationalist discourse embraced
religious plurality clearly manifested in his articles on the other, i.e. the Jews.

Egyptian national identity and the Jews in al-Risālah
A review of the head themes in al-Zayyātʼs magazine al-Risālah, as indicated
in Figure 6, largely reveals the main journalistic concerns at the time. Read
together, the frequently discussed key clusters address anticolonial, Arab
Egyptianness, marked by an awareness of its Islamic roots, territorial privilege,
and freedom from British occupation and local despotism. In this version of
Arab-Islamic nationalism, issues related to the Jews represent a single variable
within a political, territorial identity discourse. Compared to the Arab-Islamic
Egyptianness clusters (16 & 60, at 0.092 & 0.062%), the Jews-related cluster
(65) is less frequent (0.028%). While incorporating the territorial and
nationalistic Arabness in cluster 65, it also features Zionism within the
interplay of the territorially national and the historically religious. So, the
discussion of Zionism was bounded by an Arabness (in language and culture)
and Islamness.
Figure 6 outlines the magazine al-Risālah’s approach to such opposite
narratives, featuring a topic (social) network, with the head themes
highlighted in green, and reflecting the magazine’s highest probabilistic
clusters or paradigmatic frame. Within its discourse on the religiopolitical
tradition, the territorial sense of the Egyptian nation looms large. This
territorial attachment to the homeland (patrie) is based on Ibn Khaldūn’s
(1902) notion of 'Aṣabiyya (`communal or tribal solidarityʼ), which implies
an ethnic sense of genealogical partisanship. It also builds on al-Ṭahṭāwī’s
(1801-1873) concept of patriotism (Waṭanīyyah), which involves
nationalistic attachment or “sense of solidarity … in relation to a particular
geographical territory” (Colla 133). This double sense of patriotism accounts
for the braiding of the religious, the communal, and the territorial in the
clusters addressing nationalism (including ethno-religious Arabo-Islamism
and modern state patriotism).

6 Figures such as Riḍā and al-Zayyāt — and not unlike other Arab nationalists following the Napoleonic invasion of Egypt — turned to the

Arabic language as “the primary criterion in defining the cultural and sociopolitical identities of the Arabic-speaking peoples” (Suleiman
64–65) This recourse to the Arabic language in nurturing a collective sense of national identity helped in transcending ethnic and religious
boundaries.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Figure 6. Cluster network in al-Risālah.

al-Zayyāt intended al-Risālah to drive a cultural and intellectual revival
by enhancing literary taste and maintaining cultural enlightenment (“ArRisālah” 3). Al-Zayyāt believed that genuine progress could be attained
through a wholesome synthesis of the old and the new, the Arab and the
Western, the Islamic and the Christian — not unlike Riḍā — and that
al-Risālahʼs core principle was to connect and link these aspects. Yet this
synthetic approach was to be embraced within an Arab culture whose impact
on the history of world progress was intensely outlined by al-Zayyāt in a series
of articles on “The impact of Arab culture on knowledge and the world”
(“Athar al-Thaqāfah” nos.1, 3, and 4). According to al-Zayyāt, and unlike
the repressive Roman and Byzantine empires, the Arabo-Islamic culture had
“civilized the world”, “revived chivalric values”, “instilled tolerance”, and
“liberated the mind” (“Athar al-Thaqāfah” no.1, p.8). Al-Zayyāt compared
this Arab culture to the Latin culture in medieval Europe, which had induced
the light of knowledge and civility in a then-barbaric Europe. Through the
efforts of Raymond de Sauvetât’s Toledo School of Translators, the gems of
Arab sciences were translated into Latin and thus infused vitality into a then
stagnating West (al-Risālah (no.3, p.9). For al-Zayyāt, Egypt was the seat of
Islam and Arabism and the hub of any potential pan-Islamist and pan-Arabist
revival (“Miṣr wa al-Umam” 1401-1402).
However, he acknowledged that the renewal of Arabic literature, which
lay at the heart of that Arabo-Islamic culture, should be grafted with the
literatures of other nations, European arts, and modern thought, through
translation (“Taṭʻīm al-Adab al-ʻArabī” 1861). Denouncing philistine calls
for a revival of a pharaonic Egypt at the expense of an Arab Egypt, he

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Figure 7. al-Risalah clusters 34 and 70.

believed that modern culture, in its spirit, draws on Islam and Christianity,
and in its literature on Arab and Western literatures, and in its science on
purely European mentality. But unlike Riḍā, whose ultimate objective was a
united Arabo-Islamic nation, al-Zayyāt’s focus was primarily on an AraboIslamic Egypt that would assimilate Arab and Western cultures, along with
the Islamic, Christian, and Pharaonic within a predominant Egyptianness. As
a disciple of Muḥammad 'Abduh, Egyptian nationalism that was grounded
on a multivocal and multilingual culture, featured prominently in his liberal
thought and discourse. He unreservedly believed that such nationalism
should be propped against Arabic literature that would be rejuvenated
through the translation of a “dynamic” Western literature and culture as a
vehicle for modernity (Tageldin 226). Al-Zayyāt’s a syncretic worldview of
7
a “supra-Egyptianism” encompassed Egyptian nationalism and Arab-Islamic
cultural identity without excluding Western culture, which – for him – was
vital for the desired “reform and revival of the indigenous heritage” (Gershoni
and J. Jankowski 145).
The two clusters in Figure 7 reflect parallel probability rates, with cluster
70 encompassing a more inclusive paradigm of reciprocal cultural exchange
between East and West. The corresponding spiking in both clusters during
critical moments in the history of Egypt, the Arab world, and the world
in general reflect a constant interest in nurturing cultural hybridity as a
main prop for an Arab Egyptian identity that embraces a synthetic

7 For more details on the definition of supra-Egyptianism, see Gershoni and Jankowski (1995).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Weltanschauung. In his article, “Shabāb al-'Irāq fī Miṣr”, al-Zayyāt
proclaimed Arab unity, comparing it to the unity of the Muslims nation,
as a means to resist foreign occupation and induce a religious, cultural, and
political revival. Like Riḍā, he believed that Islam is the system that eventually
unites the Arab (321), knowing that – he stressed - Islam inclusively
advocated freedom and civility for all. This blend of Arabo-Islamic and
revolutionary reform persisted in al-Zayyāt’s discourse on identity, sustained
by an anticolonial defense of “freedom, fraternity and equality” (the motto
that would be reiterated years later during the January 2011 Revolution
in Egypt), in “Cairo, Jerusalem and Damascus” alike (“Tārīkhun Yathūr”
8
201–02). This same synthetic approach to nationalism, in its local (Egyptian)
sense, was a continuation of al-Manār’s two-fold objective of assimilating
modern (European) sciences and warding off European hegemony. This
synthetic identity narrative that embraced European constitutionalism and
democracy and dismissed European (British) colonization features
prominently (see Fig. 8) in cluster 43, with a probability rate of 0.08485.
It is also reflected in the reciprocal translational interplay between Arabic,
Latin, and French (considering al-Zayyāt’s personal experience in France)
as represented in cluster 46, where the probability rate is 0.05513. This
hybridized construction of national identity based on language and culture
is yet counterpoised with an identity narrative that focused purely on the
Arabo-Islamic sense of the nation, which drew mostly on religious and
territorial nexuses. Cluster 60 (probability rate of 0.06281) accentuates this
discursive formation of identity. In this narrative, al-Risālah drew on Islam
and Muslim nations, including both Arabs and Indians and on Arabic
language and culture as the basis for a collective sense of identity, where the
East was posited against the West or the rest of the world (mainly Europe and
the United State at that time).
Throughout the nearly three-decade run of the al-Risālah magazine, the
three topics represented by clusters 43, 46, and 60, witnessed a rise, especially
during critical moments in Egyptian history, including the 1936 AngloEgyptian treaty and (later) its unilateral abrogation by the Wafd government
in 1951, the Arab war against the Israeli occupation of Palestine in 1948, and
eventually the Egyptian Revolution of 1952.
Even with the introduction of a racial element in the identity equation with
the Israeli occupation of Palestine, al-Zayyāt – and al-Risālah in general
– maintained an anti-racist voice, where Egyptianness was depicted as a
collective identity that transcends religious and ethnic boundaries.

8 The article addresses the 1936 general strike in Syria.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Figure 8. Clusters 43, 46, and 60, respectively.

The Jews in al-Zayyāt’s national identity discourse
The mention of the Jews in al-Risālah is largely shaped by the anecdote
introduced by al-Zayyāt in a 1947 article (“Ḥasan, Murqus, Cohīn” 1421).
It is a story of a Muslim, a Christian, and a Jew. The Muslim Ḥasan,
a Shakespearean Antonio, seeks to borrow 500 pounds from the Shylocklike Jew, Cohen, through the mediation of the Christian broker, Muqrus.
Ḥasan intends to donate the money to the Palestinian cause, which provokes
Cohen into refusing to lend the money. al-Zayyāt’s argument was that,
although some people would claim that the Jews in Egypt were fellow
Egyptians and brothers to the Arabs and that the Jewish Rabbi (Haim)
Nahum (1960-1972) said, “the Jews of Egypt are Egyptians, not Zionists”
(1421) still all Jews believed that the Promised Land was theirs and that they
would own lands between the River Nile and the Euphrates, as stated in
Genesis. The final word of the Jew in the parable was that the three terms
“Religion, Race, and Homeland” only meant the same thing, sustaining the
same cause (1421). This stereotypical representation of the Jews finds its roots
in Arabo-Islamic history, where the Jews have been depicted as unprincipled,
usurious moneylenders and as blacks. In 1947, a writer argued that the
roots of the modern Palestinian crisis under Jewish occupation could be
traced back to the machinations of the Jew ‘Abdullāh ibn Saba’, the Jewish
Arab dubbed “Ibn al-Sawdā’” (‘son of the black womanʼ) and the “first
Zionist,” who managed through conspiracies to murder Caliph ‘Uthman and
“undermine the (Muslim) rule in Medina” (al-Afghānī 1400–02). However,
this ideologically nurtured tone did not last long in the magazine, considered
a bulwark of Egyptian liberal democracy against a then-soaring European

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

9

totalitarianism and Arab authoritarianism. The racism of the German and
Italian regimes was seen by al-Zayyāt (and other authors such as Muḥammad
ʽAbd Allāh ʽInān, Khalīl al-Hindāwī and ʽAbd al-Razzāq al-Sanahūrī) fascism
constituted a real threat to liberal democracy, which advocated social,
political, and cultural pluralism. This was why the magazine engaged in
deconstructing Nazi racist arguments through critical analysis of its
manifesto, Hitler’s Mein Kampf. (Anonymous, “Ḥawla Kitāb” 1413;
Anonymous, “Maṣdar Al-Hitlarīyah” 1775–76). Likewise, al-Zayyāt would
fiercely denounce Mussolini’s fascism as represented by the Italian occupation
of Abyssinia, “the last free fort in Africa,” in what he described as the battle
between the East and the West, or the European colonization of enslaved
eastern nations (“Qaḍīyat al-Ḥabashah” 1421-1422). He even maintained
that Egypt would not benefit from joining the Geneva League of Nations,
which was no more than a mask for bloody colonialism and a farcical
“guise for colonial powers to prey on the Eastern nations” and deprive
them of their freedom in the name of “European civility and refinement”
(“Miṣr wa ʻUṣbat”). Al-Risālah writers could also distinguish between racial
discrimination practiced against the Jews in Germany and the Zionist
occupation of Palestine. Al-Zayyāt would advocate Jewish rights against Nazi
10
racial ideology (Aryanism and anti-Semitism) in Germany
and
countermanded Zionist racism in Palestine. He maintained that Nazi antiSemitic policy against the Jews contradicted humanity and civility ("Uqtulū
al-Jū’" 800), and saw Nazism as synonymous with despotism, where people
– such as Aryan Germans – stooped to a bestial level, relinquishing their
moral principles ("Usbū’ Mahmum" 1561-1562). He equally denounced
Mussolini’s “bloody barbaric fascism” and imperialist bestiality in Abyssinia,
which was being sustained by the tacit compliance of other imperialist
Western countries, in an act of sheer “racism” and manifest “chauvinism”
(“Qaḍīyat al-Ḥabashah” 1241-1242, “Khaybat al-Madaniyyah” 1721-1722).
He viewed Hitleran Nazism as a threat, not only to the Jews but to “all
monotheistic religious traditions – Judaism, Christianity, and Islam” and
11
also to “secular human civilization” (“Jarīrat al-Nāzīyyah” 1927). Acerbically
flouting Hitler’s Nazi racism, al-Zayyāt compared Hitler to a false prophet
who claimed his Mein Kampf to be a holy book. Drawing on this religiously
hued tirade of Hitlerʼs and his book, al-Zayyāt dismissed such Aryan racist
and supremacist discourse as opposed not only to Judaism but also to
Christianity and to Islam, whose message was one of “humanism,
compassion, and love” (1928). Despite al-Zayyāt’s earlier admiration of

9 See for instance articles such as al-Zayyāt (“Maʽrakat” 2118-2119), Muḥammad ʽAbd Allāh ʽInān, “al-Fāshistiyyah,” 849, and “Azmat al-

Dīmuqrāṭiyyah,” 528; “Aḥlām al-salām wa-kayfa inhārat fī-l-khamsat ʽashr ʽāman?”, al-Risālah, 21 October 1935, 1687-1689.
10 On German anti-Semitism, Aryanism and racial ideology, see al-Zayyāt (“Nazariyyat” 1758-1759) and "Bayna " 197-198.
11 The article is thoroughly discussed in Gershoni (231-232).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Figure 9. Cluster 65 in al-Risālah.

Hitler’s positive domestic performance, especially in reforming the economy,
he did not hesitate in denouncing the man’s hubristic authoritarianism
(1928).
According to al-Zayyāt, Palestine, the sanctuary of the three heavenly religions
(Judaism, Christianity, and Islam) was subdued by “Titus (Flavius’;
European) vanquishing colonialism and Judas’ (Judaic) greedy investment”
after having been “purely Arabized”(“Yā lallāh” 1241). So, the Jews occupying
Palestine were the descendants of the Wandering Jew who had denied Jesus
shade and food (taunted him) and who were thus cursed by Jesus, doomed
to roam the earth until the Second Coming. Thus, al-Zayyāt asserted,
attempting to dwell the Jews among other people meant acting “against
nature and belying Jesus’ prophecy” (1241). He built his argument about
Arab Palestine against world Jews who had rallied to “insolently wage war
against the Arabs in Palestine,” being driven by religious and nationalist
motives, and backed by “Jewish bankers” and “English arms factories”. That
was why he turned to both the Arabs and the Muslims on the basis of both
12
religious and ethnic bonds with the Palestinians (1242). The graph in Figure
9 features the main cluster 65 on Jews, Judaism, and Zionism in al-Risālah.
Since the Jews-related topics in the 50- and 100-keys stemming gives us only
one cluster, we expand stemming to 500 keys, knowing that determining
the number of topics is a preprocessing step. As a result, we get four
clusters, where the topics on Jews range from the coexistence of the Jews

12 Here, al-Zayyāt used the term “Asabiyyah,” introduced by Ibn Khaldūn (1902).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Figure 10. Jews-related clusters varying between the religious (Judaeo-Islamic (117), Judaeo-Christian (497)), and the
territorial, nationalist (Judaeo(Zionist)-Arab (216), Judaeo-Islamic/Arabist (10; 65)).

and the Muslims in Medina, through the acquittal of the Jewish French
officer, Dreyfus, and the oppression of the Jews in Europe, the “Protocols
of the Elders of Zion”, (Lionel de) Rothschild’s role in helping the British
government purchase Khedive Ismail’s Suez Canal shares, secret Jewish
associations, Theodor Herzl’s schemes, the Partition Plan (for Palestine), the
British mandate on the difference between Judaism and Zionism (clusters
497, 241, 117, and 216, with probability rates of 0.00785, 0.0049, 0.01155,
and 0.01078, respectively). Yet, in the dominant two clusters (10 at 0.07304
and 65 at 0.02803, keyed through a 50-cluster stemming and a 100-cluster
stemming, respectively), the main thread addresses Arabism, Judaism,
Zionism, the Torah, the East, territory, and unity of the Arabo-Muslim
nations. Figure 10 is a detailed visualization of the probability rates of cluster
65 (in a 100-cluster stemming), compared with the average rates of other
relevant clusters (in a 50- and 500-key stemming). It reflects a relative rise in
1936, coinciding with the 1936–39 Arab Revolt in Palestine, spiking in the
WWII-years, and then peaking in 1948, with the Partition Plan.
Like Riḍā, the religiously oriented al-Zayyāt drew on the notion of Shura
('consultationʼ) as the proper mode of governance, where there was no place
for authoritarian Nazis such as Hitler, nor for “racist fanaticism” or “antiSemitism,” which was then taking root in Germany (“Naẓarīyat al-Jins”
1758-1759).
However, in al-Zayyāt’s discourse on (Egyptian) nationalism, factors such
as 'race,ʼ 'ethnicity,ʼ and `racial affiliationʼ were meaningless, since national
identity draws on common language, culture, and historical experience. He
believed 'raceʼ was a social construct that built on temporal and
Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

environmental conditions, and that the characteristic elements of a
nationality were `socio-cultural,ʼ including language, culture, values,
sentiment, and religion. Hence, he considered the Persian Badīʽ al-Zamān
(also known as Bediüzzaman) as Arab, the Swiss Rousseau as French
13
(“Firʻawnīyūn Wa-ʻArab!” 3). In this sense too, Egyptian 'Aṣabīyah
transcended communal (religious, sectarian, or ethnic) partisanship into a
patriotic sense that involved both historical (Pharaonic, Arab, and Coptic)
and territorial. It derived from al-Ṭahṭāwī’s definition of Waṭanīyyah
14
('patriotic love of homelandʼ). This open or more liberal national concept
transcends the exclusivist Egyptianism, which was grounded in territoriality,
into – à la Gershoni and J. P. Jankowski (1995) – a “supra-Egyptian”
conceptualization of national identity. The same pan-Arabist, pan-Islamicist
discourse was also upheld by Rashid Riḍā, which largely reflected the
dominant sentiment at the time (Gershoni and J. P. Jankowski 28). Gershoni
notes that al-Zayyāt “strove to forge an Egyptian Arab national identity that
would be integrated into the broader Pan-Arab nationalist framework” (83).
At a local level, small states, or “small fish” in al-Zayyāt’s words, should unite
in a confederate union, in the American model, to protect themselves from
“the big sharks”, such as Hitlerist Germany, Mussolinist Italy, or Stalinist
Russian (“Fashal al-‘Aql!” 482). Hence, the Arab and Muslim nations should
unite to defend themselves and to ensure their peace. This call for an
Islamically hued pan-Arab union, similar to American confederacy, sustained
by a synthetic blending of the traditional and the modern, spirituality of the
East, and material scientism of the West, represented the main paradigm in
the identity discourse of both Riḍā and al-Zayyāt. It was representative of
the mainstream dialogue on Arabo-Islamic identity during the inter-war and
post-war periods, largely shaping the Nahḍah discourse in the Arab world
and still finds echoes at the present time.
Al-Zayyāt represented the future progressive version of Riḍā. Just as they
rejected nativist exclusivity and purism, they managed to distinguish between
(national) identity assertion and assimilation of Western scientific and
industrial progress without slipping into the trap of blind mimicking of
the colonizer or passivist Westernization. Al-Zayyāt compared passivist
Westernization to “mental bondage,” which is more vicious than “physical
bondage” (“al-Thaqāfah” 122). For them both, “selective imitation” that did
not contradict Eastern spirit or values was the key. This is why al-Zayyāt
denounced Ataturk’s Westernized recreation of the state at the expense of
the Arabo-Muslim nation, faith, and culture (“Ila ayn yusāq” 362). For

13 Though we focus on al-Zayyāt’s articles in al-Risālah, other writers engaged in a deconstruction of racist arguments, including Zākī (“al-

ʽUnsūriyyah”) and Muhammad (“al-Siyasah”).
14 On al-Tahtawi’s definition of Egyptian patriotism, see Colla ( 2007).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

him, European civilization was intrinsically materialistic and violent, and
thus should be met with a revival of Eastern spirituality or cosmopolitan
humanism.
Like Riḍā, al-Zayyāt pragmatically advocated a pluralist national (Ummatic/
statal) identity that drew on the social virtues of monotheistic religions and
embraced (Shura-like) democracy. Only then, he maintained, could people of
different races and ethnicities enjoy fraternity and equality. Like Riḍā too, alZayyāt concluded that Egypt and the rest of the Arab-Muslim world should
side with the Allies, “the democratic camp,” in their fight against the Nazis,
pragmatically deferring the fight against these very colonial powers as a second
priority (“Jarīrat al-Nāzīyah” 1928).

Conclusion
This paper illustrates the integration of thematic qualitative research and
topic modeling, presenting an example of how these two approaches can
be blended in Arab studies. Such a methodology has the capability to pave
the way for innovative research forms that leverage both the advantages of
human interpretation and automated processing. We conducted a thorough
analytical examination by considering the identified paradigmatic outlines
revealed through distant reading and topic modeling. The goal was to
delineate comprehensive or overarching patterns that offer fresh perspectives
for approaching two major Arab magazines in the first half of the twentieth
century, both on an individual and collective basis. This article tries to
challenge Orientalist periodization that entrenches essentialist Western ideas
about the Arabo-Islamic East, by tracing the routes of continuity in the
Arabo-Islamic intellectual tradition of reform. It has sought to induce an
epistemological shift beyond the long history of colonial monopoly. Through
topic modeling, we have captured the main representational paradigm or
discursive framing of Arabo-Islamic identity during inter-war and post-war
Egypt, with a specific reference to magazine articles written by Riḍā and
al-Zayyāt, in al-Manār and al-Risālah, the two leading literary/cultural
platforms at the time. We have addressed such discursive praxis as a cultural
continuum, rather than separate moments in Egyptian history. Blending
digital (distant) and close analytical readings of relevant articles, we have
nuanced the almost settled views of both luminary figures in the Arab
Nahḍah. Indeed, a broader analytical lens would help us transcend the
cultural and identitarian binaries of Egypt, which is frequently grappled as
Pharaonic, Islamic, Arab, Middle Eastern, or even European. In addition, we
have attempted to frame the legacy of Riḍā and al-Zayyāt as a hybridizing
force that aimed to formulate a collective identity through (re)appropriation
of modernist cultural legacy as integral to an Arab and Egyptian identity and
thus avoiding purism (nativist Egyptianist) and exclusion. Our discussion of
high probability clusters on topics such as language, culture, and race, shows
the two intellectuals as truly reflecting the anti-imperialist spirit of their age.
They worked on linking the past to the present, and the East to the West.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

In their assimilationist publishing enterprises, they induced a cultural revival
that nurtured the intellectual Nahḍah, which in turn produced a hybrid
knowledge informed by both Arabo-Islamic and European cultures.
Data repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/6BJUJN

Acknowledgement
This article was made possible by NPRP grant NPRP10-0115-170163 from
the Qatar National Research Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation). The
project of "Computational Study of Culture: Cultural Analytics for Modern
Arab and Islamic Studies” is led by Dr. Eid Mohamed. The findings achieved
herein are solely the responsibility of the authors.
Submitted: November 23, 2023 EDT, Accepted: January 15, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

works cited
al-Afghānī, Said. Al-Ṣihyūnī al-Awwal!” Al-Risālah. no. ue 651, Dec. 1945, pp. 1400–02.
al-Zayyāt, Aḥmad Ḥasan. “Al-Thaqāfah al-Mudhabdhabah.” Al-Risālah, no. 82, Jan. 1935, pp.
121–22.
---. “Al-Thaqāfah al-Mudhabdhabah.” Al-Risālah, no. 82, Jan. 1935, pp. 121–22.
---. “Ar-Risālah.” Al-Risālah, no. 1, Jan. 1933, p. 3.
---. “Athar At-Thaqāfah al-‘Arabiyyah Fi al-‘Ilm Wa al-‘Alam.” Al-Risālah, no. 1, Jan. 1933.
---. “Athar At-Thaqāfah al-‘Arabiyyah Fi al-‘Ilm Wa al-‘Alam.” Al-Risālah, no. 3, Feb. 1933.
---. “Athar At-Thaqāfah al-‘Arabiyyah Fi al-‘Ilm Wa al-‘Alam.” Al-Risālah, no. 4, Mar. 1933.
---. “Fashal al-‘Aql!” Al-Risālah, no. 350, Mar. 1940, pp. 481–82.
---. “Firʻawnīyūn Wa-ʻArab!” Al-Risālah, no. 18, Oct. 1933, pp. 3–4.
---. “Ḥassan, Murquṣ, Cohīn.” Al-Risālah, no. 756, Dec. 1947, p. 1421.
---. “Ilā Ayn Yusāq Al-Atrāk?” Al-Risālah, no. 88, Mar. 1935, pp. 361–62.
---. “Jarīrat Al-Nāzīyah ʻala al-Insānīyah.” Al-Risālah, no. 327, Oct. 1939, pp. 1927–28.
---. “Khaybat Al-Madaniyyah.” Al-Risālah, no. 121, Oct. 1935, pp. 1721–22.
---. “Maʽrakat Al-Fāshistiyyah Wa-al-Dīmuqrāṭiyyah.” Al-Risālah, no. 234, Dec. 1937, pp. 2118–19.
---. “Miṣr Wa ʻUṣbat Al-Umam.” Al-Risālah, no. 114, Sept. 1935, pp. 1441–42.
---. “Miṣr Wa-Ṣawt al-Umam al-Sharqīyah.” Al-Risālah, no. 113, Sept. 1935, pp. 1401–02.
---. “Naẓarīyāt Al-Jins Wa al-Sulālah Wa al-Khuṣūmah al-Sāmīyah.” Al-Risālah, no. 121, Oct. 1935,
pp. 1758–59.
---. “Qaḍīyat Al-Ḥabashah: Qaḍīyyat al-Sharq Wa-Qaḍīyat al-Ḥurrīyah.” Al-Risālah, no. 109, Aug.
1935, pp. 1241–42.
---. “Shabāb Al-‘Irāq Fī Miṣr.” Al-Risālah, no. 139, Mar. 1936, pp. 3321–22.
---. “Tārīkhun Yathūr.” Al-Risālah, no. 136, Feb. 1936, pp. 201–02.
---. “Taṭʻīm al-Adab al-ʻArabī.” Al-Risālah, no. 176, Nov. 1955, pp. 1861–62.
---. “Uqtulū Al-Jū‘ Taqtulū al-Ḥarb.” Al-Risālah, no. 303, Apr. 1939, pp. 799–800.
---. “Usbū’ Maḥmum: Bayna al-Dimuqratiyya Wa al-Diktatūriyya.” Al-Risālah, no. 273, Sept. 1938,
pp. 1561–62.
---. “Yā Lallāh Li-Filasṭīn.” Al-Risālah, no. 265, Aug. 1938, pp. 1241–42.
Al-Jāḥiẓ, Abū ʻAmr. “Risālat Fakhr Al-Sūdān ʻalá al-Bīḍān [The Pride of Blacks over Whites].” AlRasāʼil, vol. 1, 1991, pp. 177–226.
Al-Makhzumi, Muḥammad. Khātirat Jamāl Al-Dīn al-Afghānī [The Memoir of Al-Afghani].
Maṭābi’ Dār al-fikr, 1931.
Alwan, Mohammed Bakir. “Jews in Arabic Literature, 1830–1914.” Al-‘Arabiyya, vol. 11, no. 1/2,
1978, pp. 50–52.
Al-Ya‘qubi, Aḥmad ibn Isḥāq. Tarīkh Al-Ya‘qubī. Dār Bayrūt lil-Ṭibāʻah wa-al-Nashr, 1960.
Anonymous. “Ḥawla Kitāb.” Al-Risālah, no. 60, Aug. 1934, p. 1413.
---. “Maṣdar Al-Hitlarīyah.” Al-Risālah, no. 278, Oct. 1938, pp. 1775–76.
Anṭūn, Faraḥ Ūrshalīm al-Jadīdah wa-Fatḥ al-ʻArab Bayt al-Maqdis. “New Jerusalem or the Arab
Conquest of Bayt Al-Maqdi.” Hindawi, vol. 2013, 1904.
Arslan, Shakib. Al-Sayyid Rashid Rida Wa-Ikha’ Arba’in Sanah. Ibn Zaydun, 1937.
Callaway, Elizabeth, et al. “The Push and Pull of Digital Humanities: Topic Modeling the ‘What Is
Digital Humanities?’ Genre.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 14, no. 1, 2020.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Colla, Elliott. Conflicted Antiquities: Egyptology, Egyptomania, Egyptian Modernity. Duke
University Press, 2008, https://doi.org/10.1215/9780822390398.
Esposito, John L. The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality? Oxford University Press, 1992.
Fallucchi, Francesca, et al. “Digital Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis of Arabic Textbooks.”
Future Internet, vol. 14, no. 8, July 2022, p. 237, https://doi.org/10.3390/fi14080237.
Gershoni, Israel, editor. “‘The Crime of Nazism Against Humanity’: Ahmad Hasan Al-Zayyat and
the Outbreak of World War II.” Arab Responses to Fascism and Nazism: Attraction and Repulsion,
University of Texas Press, 2014, pp. 217–42.
Gershoni, Israel, and James Jankowski. Confronting Fascism in Egypt: Dictatorship versus Democracy
in the 1930s. Stanford University Press, 2010, https://doi.org/10.11126/stanford/
9780804763431.001.0001.
Gershoni, Israel, and James P. Jankowski. Redefining the Egyptian Nation, 1930–1945. Cambridge
University Press, 1995. Crossref, https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511523991.
Grallert, Till. “Catch Me If You Can! Approaching the Arabic Press of the Late Ottoman Eastern
Mediterranean through Digital History.” Geschichte und Gesellschaft, vol. 47, no. 1, June 2021,
pp. 58–89, https://doi.org/10.13109/gege.2021.47.1.58.
Gramsci, Antonio. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. Lawrence & Wishart, 1971.
Gribetz, Jonathan Marc. Defining Neighbors: Religion, Race, and the Early Zionist-Arab Encounter.
Princeton University Press, 2014, https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400852659.
Haim, Sylvia G. “Arabic Antisemitic Literature: Some Preliminary Notes.” Jewish Social Studies, vol.
17, no. 4, Oct. 1955, pp. 307–12.
Hourani, Albert. Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age, 1798–1939. Oxford University Press, 2013, pp.
1798–939.
---. Minorities in the Arab World. Oxford University Press, 1947.
Ibn Khaldūn, ʿAbd al-Raḥmān. Al-Muqaddimah [Prolegomenon to History]. al-Maṭbaʻah alAmīrīyah, 1902.
Kamel, Anas Mustafa. “Anas Mustafa Kamel’s Al-Raʼsmālīyah al-Yahūdīyah Fī Miṣr [Jewish
Capitalism in Egypt].” Dar Merit, 2006.
Kedourie, Sylvia. Arab Nationalism: An Anthology. University of California Press, 1962.
Makdisi, Ussama. Age of Coexistence: The Ecumenical Frame and the Making of the Modern Arab
World. University of California Press, 2019, https://doi.org/10.1525/9780520971745.
Mohamed, Emad, and Zeeshan Ali Sayyed. “Arabic-SOS: Segmentation, Stemming, and
Orthography Standardization for Classical and Pre-Modern Standard Arabic”.” DATeCH2019:
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Digital Access to Textual Cultural Heritage,
May 2019, pp. 27–32. Crossref, https://doi.org/10.1145/3322905.3322927.
Moretti, Franco. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History. Verso, 2005.
Muhammad, Muhammad ʽAwad. “Al-Siyasah Wa-ʽIlm al-Ajnās.” Al-Risālah, no. 33, Feb. 1934, pp.
283–84.
Nadim, ‘Abd al-Fattah. Sulafat Al-Nadim Fi Muntakhabat as-Sayyid `Abdullah al-Nadim. General
Egyptian Book Organization, 2008.
Piper, Andrew. “Novel Devotions: Conversional Reading, Computational Modeling, and the
Modern Novel.” New Literary History, vol. 46, no. 1, 2015, pp. 63–98, http://www.jstor.org/
stable/24542659.
Rafea, Ahmed, and Nada A. GabAllah. “Topic Detection Approaches in Identifying Topics and
Events from Arabic Corpora.” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 142, 2018, pp. 270–77,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.10.492.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Racio-national Imaginary and Discursive Formation of Arabo-Islamic Identity in al-Manār and al-Risālah: A Topic Modelin…

Riḍā, Muḥammad Rashīd. “Al-Inqilāb al-Dīnī al-Siyāsī Fī al-Jumhūrīyah al-Turkīyah.” Al-Manār,
vol. 25, no. 4, May 1924, pp. 273–99.
---. “Al-Masʼlatān al-Sharqīyyah Wa al-Ṣihyūniyyah.” Al-Manār, vol. 17, no. 4, Mar. 1914, pp.
319–20.
---. “Al-Ṣihyūnīyah.” Al-Manār, vol. 17, no. 5, Apr. 1914, pp. 385–90.
---. “Al-Waṭanīyah Wa-al-Qawmīyah Wa-al-ʻAṣabīyah Wa-al-Islām.” Al-Manār, vol. 33, no. 3, May
1933, pp. 190–91.
---. “Al-Yahūd Fī Faransā Wa-Fī Miṣr.” Al-Manār, vol. 1, no. 2, Feb. 1898, pp. 53–55.
---. “‘Āqibat al-Sharīf Ḥusayn Ibn ‘Alī Ma‘a al-Injilīz”.” Al-Manār, vol. 26, no. 2, June 1925, pp.
159–60.
---. “Fatḥ Al-Yahūd Li-Bāb al-Fitnah Fī al-Quds.” Al-Manār, vol. 29, no. 6, Oct. 1928, pp. 414–17.
---. Fātiḥat Al-Sanah al-Ūlā.”al-Manār. no. 1, Jan. 1898, pp. 9–14.
---. “Ḥayāt Ummah Baʻda Mawtihā; Jamʻīyat al-Yahūd al-Ṣihyūnīyah.” Al-Manār, vol. 4, no. 21, Jan.
1902, pp. 801–09.
---. “Iṣrār Faransah ʻalā Ikhrāj Al-Barbar Min al-Islām.” Al-Manār, vol. 31, no. 4, vol. 31, Oct. 1930,
pp. 309–11.
---. “Manāfiʻ Al-Ūrūbbīyīn Wa-Maḍārriihim Fī al-Sharq; al-Istibdād.” Al-Manār, vol. 10, no. 4, June
1907, pp. 279–84.
---. “Shubuhāt Al-Masīḥīyīn ‘alā al-Islām Wa Shubuhāt at-Tārīkh ‘alā al-Yahūdīyah al-Naṣrānīyah.”
Al-Manār, no. ue 10, vol. 4, July 1901, pp. 379–87.
---. Tarikh Al-Ustadh al-Imam al-Shaykh Muḥammad ʻAbduh. al-Manar Press, 1931.
Shahin, Emad Eldin. Through Muslim Eyes: M. Rashid Riḍā and the West. International Institute
of Islamic Thought, 1993.
Suleiman, Yasir. The Arabic Language and National Identity. Edinburgh University Press, 2003.
Tageldin, Shaden. Disarming Words: Empire and the Seductions of Translation in Egypt. University
of California Press, 2011.
Zākī, Aḥmad. “Al-ʽUnṣūriyyah.” Al-Risālah, no. 30, Jan. 1934, pp. 191–94.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

