Zaki, Mai, and Emad Mohamed. “Two Translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina
(Children of Our Alley): A Computational-Stylistic Analysis.” Journal of Cultural Analytics,
vol. 9, no. 3, June 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116239.

ARTICLE

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley):
A computational-stylistic analysis
Mai Zaki1, Emad Mohamed2
1 American University of Sharjah, 2 Nazarbayev University

Keywords: literary translation, computational analysis, translator style, stylistics
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116239

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 3, 2024

Comparative studies of different translations for the same source text can be
valuable sources of insights relevant to the fluid notion of ‘translation style’.
Such studies can employ a wide variety of techniques, including computational
analysis which targets specific elements in the text in order to allow for a
systematic view of translator style. This study attempts a computational-stylistic
analysis of the two English translations of Naguib Mahfouz’s controversial
novel Awlad Haratina (literally, Children of our Alley). The aim of the study is
two-fold. First, it aims to show how quantifiable computational and distant
reading techniques can help identify patterns of stylistic differences between
these two translations. Second, it attempts to situate the results of this analysis
within the wider social context of the two English translations (Stewart 1981
and Theroux 1996) of one of the most famous modern Arabic novels. The
results clearly show patterns of linguistic use specific to each of the two
translations highlighting differences in lexical variety and richness, sentence
structure, readability level, stylometric analysis as well some lexical choices.
These results can be interpreted within the social context of producing those
two translations, with particular reference to characteristics of retranslation as
discussed in the literature.

1. Introduction
The novel under study by the Egyptian author and Nobel laureate Naguib
Mahfouz is one of the most controversial novels in the history of modern
Egyptian (and Arabic) literature. Originally published in serials in the
Egyptian newspaper Al-Ahram in 1959, the highly allegorical novel which
resonates with George Orwell’s narrative style, caused ripples among the
Egyptian readership and beyond with long-lasting effects. The novel ended
up earning its author both condemnations from religious figures and praises
from international institutions. It was specifically cited as one of the premises
of awarding Mahfouz in 1988 the only Nobel Prize in Literature awarded to
an Arab author until now. The Swedish Academy described it as “an unusual
novel”, in its press release announcing the prize (1988), where the main theme
is “man’s everlasting search for spiritual values”. Depicting the religious and
social history of man, the novel uses the narrative framework of a Cairo
alley to chronicle developments from Genesis to modern times. With careful
allegorical delineations of arguably God, Satan and a number of prophets,

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

the novel outraged religious leaders accusing the author of verging on heresy,
and is often seen as a motivation for the assassination attempt on Mahfouz in
1994.
But the debates surrounding the novel since its publication in Arabic did not
stop there; they also extended to its English translations. Awlad Haratina,
which has been translated to many languages, is famously known to have two
different English translations. The first one by Philip Stewart was published
in 1981 by Heinemann under the name “Children of Gebelawi” Mahfouz.
However, copyright issues exacerbated by the controversy surrounding its
reception and motivated by its author’s post-Nobel Prize fame, led to another
translation to be commissioned by the American University in Cairo. Thus,
the second translation by Peter Theroux was published by Doubleday in 1996
under the title “Children of the Alley” Mahfouz.
Writers, journalists and researchers have been interested in discussing and
chronicling the legacy of Awlad Haratina as well as the contexts of
commissioning its two translations with a 15 years gap in between (AbuHaidar; Ewais; Shoair). The two translations have also been the subject of
several studies which analysed them from a wide variety of perspectives
(Lundquist; Roded; Torabi and Seyedi; El-Gabalawy; Hezam, among others).
Moreover, and perhaps less commonly, the two translators themselves
engaged in commenting on each other’s work in a somewhat lengthy and
public debate (Stewart; Theroux, “Children of the Alley: A Translator’s
Tale”; Theroux, “Naguib Mahfouz’s Children of the Alley”). However, very
few attempted to actually highlight the stylistic differences between the two
translations in a systematic way. Therefore, this study aims to fill this gap
by applying stylometric and corpus-assisted distant reading techniques in
order to compare the two translations and highlight stylistic similarities and
differences between them. The quantitative and data-driven analysis sheds a
new light on the English translations as texts and provides a different angle to
viewing each translator’s style.
The paper tries to answer the following questions:
1. To what extent do the translations formally differ?
2. Can we use computational tools to tell the differences between the
two translators and their respective styles?
3. What can the results tell us about re-translation and the general
socio-cultural context of producing these two particular
translations?
The paper is organised as follows: section 2 provides background information
on the wider area of corpus studies of translation and translator style through
a brief review of relevant literature. Section 3 briefly presents the two
translations under study and the circumstances of their publication. Section
Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

4 introduces the data and methodology, outlining the corpus-assisted and
computational techniques utilised in the study. Section 5 presents the results
of the analysis. Section 6 discusses the interpretation of the results as
indicators of the stylistic identity of the translators as well as a reflection
of the wider social context in which the two translations were produced.
Finally, the paper ends with some concluding remarks on the affordances of
the corpus-assisted distant reading approach in studying translator style.

2. Corpus studies and translator style
The huge developments in corpus linguistics in the last few decades meant
that its intersecting points with other disciplines would become hot spots
for research. The field of translation studies is no exception. In addition
to corpus-assisted methodologies and corpus-based machine translation
techniques which help in the activity of translation itself, corpus linguistics
has also been increasingly beneficial to descriptive translation studies. There
are several areas of interest in corpus-based translation studies, including
research into translation universals (Baker, “Corpus Linguistics and
Translation Studies: Implications and Applications”; Mauranen and
Kujamäki), translation norms (Malmkjær, “Norms and Nature in Translation
Studies”; Munday), language change (House; Kranich et al.) and individual
variation among translators (Saldanha; Baker, “The Treatment of Variation
in Corpus-Based Translation Studies”). This study follows the latter line of
research strands.
The aim of corpus-based studies of individual variation in translations is
to investigate translator style. The concept of translator style has been
extensively discussed in relation to translational stylistics (Baker, among
others). Generally speaking, translator style refers to the individual writing
and translating choices made by a translator when translating a text from one
language to another. This can include decisions about word choice, sentence
structure, cultural references, idioms and the overall tone and style of the
translation. According to Newmark, translator style is “the individual way
a translator expresses the message of the SL text in the TL version, which
may be determined by his register, his culture and his personality” (54).
Venuti (Translator’s Invisibility) expresses a similar opinion when he argues
that the translator’s style is a reflection of his or her ideological, cultural and
professional identities.
Despite the previous definitions, or perhaps because of them, Saldanha
acknowledges that the notion of style “is a notoriously vague concept” (26).
Hence, she attempts to outline a methodological approach in defining it.
According to her, there are mainly two approaches: (a) source text (ST)oriented studies (e.g. Malmkjær; Boase-Beier); and (b) target text (TT)oriented studies (e.g. Baker) of translator style. As the names suggest, studies
in the first group focus on the style of the translation, rather than the
translator, since it is defined by its relation to the ST. Yet, Boase-Beier (4)
Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Figure 1. The role of style in translation according to Boase-Beier (89)

Figure 2. Continuum of elements of translator style according to Youdale (180)

also extends this view to outline four different ways style can have a role in
translation (as Figure 1 illustrates) where it exploits the intersection of ST and
TT on one hand, and author’s/translator’s choices and effect on readers on
the other.
At the other end of this spectrum, TT-oriented studies of style focus entirely
on the translated texts, usually by comparing features in two or more corpora
of different translators without direct reference to the ST. Furthermore,
Youdale (180) highlights some of the factors which can influence a
translator’s style seen as points on a continuum of conscious vs unconscious
elements of a translator’s style (see Figure 2). The nature of a continuum
implies fuzzy distinction lines, and the author acknowledges this as he
explains that “different aspects of style may be located at different points
along the continuum, and these points themselves may vary from translator
to translator and also vary over time” (Youdale 181).
Computer-assisted translation studies, i.e. those which use computational
methods and tools to analyse the writing and translating choices made
by translators, have transformed the study of translator style. Such studies

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

usually follow a specific design: a parallel corpus (monolingual or bilingual)
and a set of “linguistic indicators”, as Zanettin (21) calls them, to act as
formal operators in the study. Li et al. (106–08) and Youdale (183) provide
some examples of corpus designs and formal operators which are also used
in the domain of forensic stylistics. Some of the typical formal operators
include:
• Type-token ration (TTR)
• Average sentence length (ASL)
• Lexical density
• Lexical/collocational creativity/richness
• Hapax legomena (words occurring only once)
• Distribution of most frequent words
• Analysis of specific patterns of choice (e.g. modal particles, report
verbs, loan words, etc)
• Analysis of culture-specific items
An important caveat to note with this quantitative approach is that it does
not aim to present an exhaustive description of a translator’s style. As Li et
al. explains, “the intent is not so much to find out what is the translator’s
style but rather whether she leaves thumbprints in the translated text, and
if affirmative, what are some of the thumbprints” (109). This is what this
study aims to do; i.e. to compare the translators’ thumbprints in the two
translations of this important literary work and to highlight some of the
characteristic linguistic features for each translator. In doing so, we can
capture what Baker calls the “individual profile of linguistic habits” for a
translator.

3. Children of Gebelawi/the Alley: A background
Perhaps no other modern Arabic novel continues to conjure up debates
since its initial publication in the late fifties until now as Awlad Haratina.
El-Gabalawi (94) attempts an explanation as he argues that in this work
“Mahfouz boldly explores areas of religious thought where most Egyptian
writers fear to tread even in the contemporary age of relative liberalism.”
However, while religious interpretations of the novel were primarily
responsible for its blustery reception, others have recognised that it goes
beyond that. (Hawthorne) writes in the New York Times, “religion is only
one element of a larger critique of an entrenched patriarchal authoritarianism
that extends from the familial to the political.” It is also worth mentioning
that the publication and reception of the Arabic text was confounded from
the start by the interplay of both religion and politics. One reflection of this is
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

that the publication of the original text serialised in the Egyptian newspaper
Al-Ahram was only possible due to the interference of the Egyptian President
at the time Gamal Abdel Nasser, while the first time the novel was published
in a book was in 1962, not in its native country, but in Beirut, Lebanon. The
novel’s literal and allegorical layers of meaning associated with its characters
and events are also engulfed in a deep sense of social protest, which can be
deemed alarming or commendable depending on one’s point of view. This
combination of serious, even radical, ideas had a long-lasting impact on the
novel and its interpretation, extending to its English translations as well.
As mentioned before, the first English translation of Awlad Haratina was
published in 1981 under the name “Children of Gebelawi”. The translator
is Philip Stewart, the then young Oxford graduate who was commissioned
to translate an already controversial work at the beginning of his career.
Once commissioned with the translation, Stewart reportedly flew to Cairo
and actually worked closely with Mahfouz himself during the process (but
see Khalifa for a discussion of how both translators claimed access to the
ST author). Another claim made by (Stewart), and backed up by (Allen),
is that his translation is arguably the only complete version of the novel in
any language, including Arabic, since the original Arabic manuscript was lost
and some discrepancies have been noted both in the serialised version of AlAhram and the Beirut version.
After Mahfouz was awarded the Nobel Prize in literature in 1988, a relaunch
of the English translation of the novel to the world stage was deemed
necessary. Due to copyright complications, another translation was
commissioned with a different translator. This time it was the American
writer and translator Peter Theroux who undertook the task. His translation
was published in 1996 under the title “Children of the Alley”. A more
experienced translator, Theroux has worked with other Arabic novels from
different Arab countries including Iraq and Saudi Arabia. Theroux’s
translation would be technically considered a ‘retranslation’, a term often
used in the literature to refer to any translation of a source text which
follows a previous translation (by a different translator) in the same target
language (Mathijssen; Van Poucke; Brownlie, among others). Interestingly,
the translator himself, who noted that his translated book “has had a much
more interesting life” than him (Theroux, “Children of the Alley: A
Translator’s Tale” 671), acknowledges that Mahfouz’s “deeply spiritual and
questioning novel […] mirrors the stories of the Torah, Gospels and Koran”an interpretation he shares with many of the novel’s critics and one that
Mahfouz himself never explicitly expressed.
Therefore, both translations of the novel appeared in testing times. Stewart‘s
translation came out against the backdrop of a contentious reception of the
original text in Egypt and the Arab world, while Theroux’s translation came
out in a rather complex socio-cultural context torn between international

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

praise and local condemnation. Several critical reviews/studies of both
translations appear in the literature (e.g. Cachia; Ghorab; Khalifa, where
some of them recognise the significance of the concept of retranslation in
the discussion of this work. Although some studies (e.g. Susam-Sarajeva)
argue that retranslation is a phenomenon which lacks a detailed or systematic
study, there have been several attempts to define it. According to Baker
(“Retranslation as Rewriting” 156), “retranslation is a practice that challenges
the notion of a fixed original text and disrupts the hierarchies of linguistic
and cultural dominance”. Snell-Hornby (83) largely agrees with this
characterisation and explains that “retranslation offers an opportunity to
reflect on the status of the target language, its culture, and the implications of
the previous translation”. Indeed, much has been said about the relationship
between a retranslation and the previous one, most notably regarding the
motivations for producing a retranslation in the first place. Venuti
(Retranslations 26), for example, sees a retranslation as largely triggered by
competition, hence its need to assert its difference. He argues, in particular,
that "retranslations are designed deliberately to form particular identities’’
(26) as he emphasises that retranslations are not just a form of rewriting, but
of reinterpreting, the text.
While different studies have focussed on various aspects of the identities and
assumptions associated with a retranslation, there has been a strong argument
for the view that retranslations signal shifts in the ideological context of
reception of a certain literary work. As Venuti explains, retranslations could
be “a way of reshaping the target text to better suit the target culture”
(Venuti, “Retranslations: The Creation of Value” 37). The case of the two
English translations of Awlad Haratina would be a great example to test this
hypothesis. Going beyond the traditional view of a necessary chronological
ageing of a translation so that it requires a new one, Pym (82) highlights the
“active rivalry” that defines multiple translations of the same source text. In
his recent study, Khalifa (Khalifa, “The Hidden Violence of Retranslation:
Mahfouz’s Awlād Ḥāratinā in English” 147) takes this assumption even
further and defines retranslation as “an act of defiance”. Thus, he considers
the case of the two translations of Awlad Haratina as “a site for struggle
between competing translatorial agents.” (145) He emphasises the rivalry
between the two translators describing it as “combative interactions” (146)
and elaborates on this through the analysis of, not the texts themselves, but
the paratexts (introductions and commentaries by the translators) of the two
translations. As mentioned before, the two translators did not shy away from
commenting on each other’s translations. While Theroux publicly described
the translation of his predecessor as “perfectly adequate” and “pioneering”
(Theroux, “Children of the Alley: A Translator’s Tale” 668), he also referred
to some “bad qualities” of previous Mahfouz translations (quoted in Khalifa).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

This study brings back the focus to the actual texts of the two translations by
employing computational and stylometric processes to highlight the distinct
stylistic identities of the two translators. By interpreting these results, we also
aim to shed light on some of the defining features of retranslations which
ultimately qualify the relationship between the two translations of Awlad
Haratina.

4. Data and methodology
To the best of our knowledge, there is currently no published research
which specifically compares translator style in the two English translations
of Awlad Haratina following a corpus-assisted or a computational approach.
This study aims to rely on computational-stylistic analysis to inform our
understanding and interpretation of the differences between the two
translations. The analysis is largely data-driven as the aim is to neutralise all
other variables and focus on translator style with the purpose, as Youdale
(184) explains, “to perform an ‘x-ray’ of basic linguistic features which a close
reading of even a short passage would be unlikely to reveal”. The analysis is
based on two sub-corpora named: Gebelawi [Stewart] and Alley [Theroux]
in the chronological order of their publication. After obtaining the digitised
version of the two translations, some pre-processing was done to clean the
data from digitising errors (fixing spacing errors, fixing mistakes in converting
some letters, deleting running titles, etc). Then, the two translations were
also aligned at chapter level to allow a more detailed comparison by Chapter.
Therefore, the data was analysed in two forms: (a) as individual whole texts
saved in separate sub- corpora; and (b) as comparable texts aligned at chapter
level. Both translations follow the original division of the ST which includes
114 chapters spread over 5 parts.
The quantitative analysis includes several levels, which required the use
of both corpus management software (Sketch Engine, Kilgariff et al.) and
machine learning techniques. In particular, the analysis explores the following
aspects:
• Lexical variety (type-token ratio, lemma, hapax legomena)
• Syntactic / narrative style (sentence length and lexical bundles)
• Readability grade (level of comprehension difficulty)
• Stylometric analysis (bootstrap consensus trees, principal
components analysis, multidimensional scaling and cluster analysis)
• Translator thumbprints (lexical choices and collocation)

5. The analysis
In this section, we present the results of the computational-stylistic analysis
of the two English translations of Mahfouz’s novel Awlad Haratina.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Table 1. Type-token ratios of the two English translations.
Gebelawi

Alley

Difference a

Tokens*

145,207

147,980

+ 2773

Types

8,084

8,821

+737

Document TTR

0.05567

0.0596

+0.00393

STTR

0.4143

0.4145

+0.0002

*A token is defined as a whitespace delimited unit excluding punctuation (regular expression +)
aAll “difference” in the tables refers to the quantitative difference of the second translation Alley (Theroux) compared to the first translation Gebelawi (Stewart).

Figure 3. Comparing word count of the two translations by chapter

5.1 Lexical variety
The first step in the analysis is to look at word level. Table (1) presents the
basic statistics of the type-token ratio (TTR) in the two corpora. TTR is a
kind of vocabulary richness measurement which has been extensively used
in authorship and genre analysis. This measurement is based on the simple
(based on total words in the text) or standardised (based on every 1000 words
in the text) ratio between the number of types (the unique word forms in a
text) and tokens (the total words in a text). A higher TTR indicates that the
author uses a wider range of vocabulary. To compute the TTR for the two
translations, we used the standardised TTR where we divide each text into
chunks of 1000 words each, compute the TTR for each chunk, then average
the TTRs. This guarantees that the TTR is not affected by the size of the
text since longer texts will result in lower TTR. The results are illustrated in
Table (1).
The analysis was also expanded to compare text length variation by Chapter
as illustrated in Figure (3). The results show that Alley has more word count
in 73 chapters (64%). Table (2) below also shows the results of a detailed word
count analysis by Chapter.
The results indicate that the American translator uses more vocabulary items
than the British one. This may be due to the fact that the American translator
was more experienced, and older, and it may also be due to having the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Table 2. Detailed word count analysis by Chapter
Text

Gebelawi

Alley

Difference

Chapters count

114

114

—

Mean

1,207

1,243

+ 36

STD

287

350

+ 63

25

1,006

1,001

-5

50

1,170

1,190

+ 20

75

1,440

1,469

+ 29

Max

2,053

2,583

+ 530

Table 3. Hapax words in the two English translations
Text

Gebelawi

Alley

Difference

Hapax legomena

1,925

3,111

+ 1,186

As percentage of tokens

1.4

2.2

+ 0.8

As percentage of types

21.7

35

+ 13.3

advantage of the availability of the previous translation. One can also not rule
out the fact that, by 1996, finding synonyms and more unique words was
made easier by the availability of electronic methods.
Another kind of measurement for lexical variety is to identify the hapax
legomena, i.e. words which occur in each corpus only once. Although this
type of words could be overlooked due to their infrequency in the corpus,
they are important for the analysis of lexical richness. As Table 3 illustrates,
hapax words in Alley translation are more than Gebelawi by more than a
thousand words.
However, to put this into perspective, it is useful to compare hapax words
against the number of unique types. As Figure 4 shows, both translations
have a little over 5000 words as common unique word types, but Alley corpus
reflects a significantly higher percentage of hapax words to types indicating
higher lexical richness.

5.2. Sentence length and lexical bundles
Moving to the sentence level, we look at two main features: sentence length
and lexical bundles. We define a sentence as a string of words ending in a
full stop, a question mark or an exclamation mark. Special care was taken of
possible false friends resulting from dots in abbreviations. Both sentences and
lexical bundles are important features which can reveal translation styles in
corpus-assisted studies. Table 4 illustrates the results of comparing sentence
length in the two translations (where sentences are words without
punctuation). Alley has a little over 750 sentences more than Gebelawi, but
the difference in standard deviation of the number of words per sentence is

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Figure 4. Comparison of hapax words in unique types
Table 4. Sentence length of the two English translations
Text

Gebelawi

Alley

Difference

No. of sentences

10,465

11,244

+ 779

Mean (words per sentence)

13.8755

13.1608

- 0.7147

Median (words per sentence)

12

11

-1

Stnd. Dev.

8.7225

9.2074

+ 0.4849

Min.

1

1

—

Max.

77

85

+8

only +0.48 for Alley. Another indicator that Alley exhibits longer sentences
is that the maximum number of words in a sentence is 77 in Gebelawi, but
rises to 85 in Alley.
As for lexical bundles, or n-grams as they are also referred to in the literature,
these were retrieved using the text analysis software Sketch Engine. The study
focused on three-word up to six-word bundles which occurred a minimum of
5 times in either corpus (following Biber and Barbieri). Table 5 presents the
results of the comparative analysis of the number of lexical bundles at each
length.
The quantitative results in Table 5 reveal a few patterns. First, and consistent
with other studies such as (Liu and Afzaal), the data reveals that the number
of lexical bundles decreases as the bundle length increases. The big difference
in frequency between three-word lexical bundles and all the others confirms
the argument in (Biber and Barbieri) that three-word bundles are extremely
common as collocational patterns compared to the longer ones. Second, the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Table 5. Lexical bundles in the two translations
No. of words

Gebelawi

Alley

Types

Tokens

Types

Tokens

Three

1,142

10,015

1,143

9,984

Four

184

1,426

178

1,313

Five

38

275

24

163

Six

6

51

1

5

Table 6. Example of lexical bundle expansion in Gebelawi
Length

Frequency

3 n-gram

37

4 n-gram

37

5 n-gram

7

6 n-gram

5

the

of

the

Great

of

the

Great

House

wall

of

the

Great

House

wall

of

the

Great

House

Table 7. Example of lexical bundle expansion in Alley
Length

Frequency

3 n-gram

17

what

are

you

4 n-gram

5

what

are

you

going

5 n-gram

5

what

are

you

going

to

6 n-gram

5

what

are

you

going

to

do

comparative results of the three-word bundles show that the number of types
is almost the same in the two translations although the number of tokens in
Alley (Theroux) is slightly lower. However, both the frequency and variety
of the longer lexical bundles (four to six n-grams) are higher in Gebelawi
(Stewart) compared to the other translation. This is especially notable in
the six-word bundles which are rare in Alley translation. It is also worth
mentioning that the shorter lexical bundles are often nested in the longer
ones. Tables 6 and 7 illustrate how the shorter bundles are used as building
blocks for the longer ones in both translations. Finally, this leads to the
observation that the lexical bundles account for a slightly bigger proportion
of the text in Gebelawi (8.5% of the whole text) than they do in Alley (8% of
the whole text).
Lexical bundle frequency can be used as a proxy for language and translation
creativity. An author who is more creative may be expected to use fewer fixed
expressions. Translation poses further analysis challenges as the fewer lexical
bundles may result from the differences between the SL and the TL, or from
the translator’s being creative.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

5.3. Readability grades
Readability tests generally measure how easy a document can be read and
understood. More specifically, such tests are designed to indicate
comprehension difficulty for contemporary English by providing a numeric
gauge of the comprehension difficulty level facing readers of a particular text.
There are various types of readability tests, but they all have a common
starting point: “to identify linguistic characteristics of texts that affect reading
comprehension or, at least, are good predicators of it” (François 7). They
result in a grade which reflects years of formal education necessary for
a person to understand a particular text. Therefore, generally, a higher
readability grade indicates a more challenging reading experience and vice
versa.
In this study, nine different readability tests were applied as Table (8)
illustrates. The results show that in five of these tests there is a significant
difference in the score and grade level between the two translations, where
the second translation Alley exhibits a higher, thus more difficult, readability
grade. For example, the core measures in both the Flesch-Kincaid and the
Gunning-Fog tests is word length, measured by the average number of
syllables per word; and sentence length, i.e. the number of words per sentence
(Solnyshkina et al.; Rodríguez Timaná et al.). In both of these tests the second
translation Alley scored two points and three points higher respectively. The
Dale-Chall test, on the other hand, relies on a list of 3000 familiar words
which are considered easy to understand, while anything off that list will be
counted as a difficult word (Chall and Dale). With this measure in mind,
Alley also scored higher. The Automated readability index (ARI) depends on
word length too as an indicator of difficulty, but it measures it in terms of a
factor of characters per word instead of syllables as in other tests (De Heus
and Hiemstra). Even using this method, the second translation scored two
points higher. Finally, the Linsear Write test calculates difficulty based on a
combination of three variables: (a) the average number of easy words (two
syllables or less) per 100 words; (b) the average number of hard words (three
syllables or more) per 100 words; and (c) the average number of sentences
per 100 words (Wang et al.). In this test, Alley scored four points higher than
Gebelawi on the readability grade.

5.4. Stylometric analysis
One aspect of the translators’ style may be discovered through authorship
(or translatorship) attribution. The main premise behind authorship studies
is to use statistical and/or computational methods in order to measure some
textual features which can then enable distinguishing between texts written
by different authors (Stamatatos; El-Fiqi et al.). From a machine learning
perspective, a stylometric analysis of a text depends on the processing of
certain textual features with the purpose of quantifying the writing style of
its author.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Table 8. Results of readability grade tests for both translations
Readability Tests

Gebelawi (Stewart)

Alley (Theroux)

Score

Grade-level

Score

Grade-level

Flesch_kincaid

6.2

6

8.23

8

Flesch

75.77

7

70.7

7

Gunning_fog

8.28

8

10.66

11

Coleman_liau

6.61

7

5.92

6

Dale_chall

7.37

9-10

8.54

11-12

ARI

5.51

6

7.3

8

Linsear_write

7.5

8

11.74

12

SMOG

11.34

11

11.2

11

Spache

5.26

5

6.26

6

Average score

14.87

15.62

In this section, we use Stylo (Eder et al.), one of the main software packages
for authorship attribution, to try and find out whether the two translators
have distinct styles. Within authorship studies, style is generally understood as
the distribution of most frequent words. Stylo algorithms depend on word or
character n-grams and processes input data several times in order to establish
links between texts. We have run experiments using Bootstrap Consensus
Trees, Principal Components Analysis (PCA), Multidimensional scaling and
Cluster Analysis and the resulting visualisations reflect the relative distance
between the two texts in a 2-dimensional space.
The results from the cluster analysis and bootstrap consensus trees are not
conclusive, i.e. some chapters from both translations seem to be very similar
while others are more distinct. However, the results from both PCA and
multidimensional scaling show a clearer distinction between the two
translations which reflects a stylistic difference that can be computationally
distinguished as illustrated in Figures (5)-(8).
We get similar results when we use supervised machine learning to predict
whether a specific piece of text was the output of a specific translator. In
these experiments, we use the top 100 words as features. To make things
more consistent, we have normalised the characters’ names so these may
not be clues for the machine learning algorithms. For example, all forms of
“Gebel” were converted to “Gabal”. We then extracted the most frequent
100 words overall and used as features the frequencies of these top words in
both translations. Each translation was divided into sections of 500 words
and the feature values are the frequency of each of the top 100 words in each
of these two translations. The target was then whether the vector belonged
to Alley or Gebelawy. We used the Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost)
classification algorithm in a 10-fold cross validation setting and we used the
F1 score for evaluation. We obtained an average F1 score of 0.775, which
means that supervised machine learning can, in most cases, tell the difference
between these two translations of the novel. This also indicates that each of

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

the translators has his own style. However, although the stylometric methods
used here are useful, we acknowledge that they have several limitations. For
example, we have only relied in the analyses either on function words or the
top 100 words in each section, but we have not utilised other features such as
discourse markers or syntactic differences (which needs an additional layer of
dependency parsing in the analysis).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

5.5. Translator thumbprints
The linguistic thumbprint of a translator can be further characterised
through some of their vocabulary choices, distribution and collocations. For
example, the analysis looks into the frequency and distribution of the names
of the main characters in both translations. The novel is divided into five
parts, based on the main characters in the plot. The first four have been
Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Table 9. Frequencies of the names of main characters in both translations
Name

Gebelawi

Alley

Difference

Gebelaawi / Gabalawi

222

275

+ 53

Adham

341

354

+ 13

Gebel / Gabal

494

527

+ 33

Rifaa

343

401

+ 58

Qaasim / Qassem

426

425

-1

Arafa

279

265

- 14

Figure 9. Comparing frequencies of character names in both translations

associated with prophets as they illustrate in their own stories the progression
of mankind on earth starting with Adham (Adam), going through the three
messengers of Judaism, Chrisitanity and Islam: Gabal (Moses), Rifaa (Jesus),
Qassem (Muhammad). Then the last character represents a symbol of change,
i.e. Arafa (modernisation). The other important starting figure in the novel
is Gebelawi, who has been interpreted as a symbol of God. A corpus search
of these names in the two translations as they are spelled results in the
frequencies illustrated in Table 9. It shows a pattern for the second translation
to refer to names of characters more frequently.
A more comprehensive look at these character names in the two translations
normalises all spelling variations (e.g. Gebelaawi/Gabalawi, Qaasim/Qassem,
etc) and includes all grammatical variations (e.g. Adham/Adham’s). The
results, illustrated in Figure (9), still show a pattern in the second translation
Alley to use character names more frequently with the exception of the two
characters Qassem and Arafa.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Upon close examination of the cases where the second translation refers to
character names more frequently, it turns out that there are two main reasons
why this happens. First, in some cases, the character name appears in Alley
whereas Gebelawi uses a pronoun (he/him) instead. Secondly, which is the
more common case, Gebelawi does not mention the character’s name because
the whole phrase is deleted in the translation, whereas Alley follows the ST
more closely. In examples (1) and (2) below, the character names Rifaa and
Gabal only appear in the Alley translation.

example (1):
“”‫ ولكن يهمني اآلن أن أزور المقاهي جميعًا‬،‫ لدي عمر كامل للنجارة‬:‫فقال معتذرًا‬
“– I have a whole lifetime for carpentry, but just now I’m anxious to visit all
the caſes.” (Gebelawi, Ch. 46)
“I have a whole life for carpentry,” Rifaa said in a tone of apology, “but
for now I want to visit all the coffeehouses.” (Alley, Ch. 46)

example (2)
"‫ لعلها جريمة مزعومة لم تقع؟ واندفع الغضب في صدر زقلط لدى‬:‫ال‬
ً ‫وخرج جبل من صمته قائ‬
‫سماعه صوت‬
".‫ ال ينبغي أن نضيع الوقت في الكالم‬:‫جبل فقال‬
"Gebel broke his silence: — Perhaps it’s only an allegation.
Thudclub was furious at this, and he said: – There’s no need for us to waste
time talking." (Gebelawi, Ch. 31)
“Maybe it’s just a story—maybe this crime didn’t take place!” Gabal said,
breaking his silence.
Rage ignited in Zaqlut’s breast at the sound of Gabal’s voice. “We must not
waste our time with talk.” (Alley, Ch. 31)
However, in example (3), it is noted that even though the name Gabalawi
appears in Alley but not in Gebelawi, it is not explicitly mentioned in the ST
either but was a result of an enriched interpretation on part of the translator.

example (3)
”‫ال من ريع الوقف ورأى األبنية تشيد باسم الوقف ثم تتوقف بأمر قدري‬
ً ‫“ونال نصيبه كام‬
“..received his share of the Trust’s revenue and watched the new buildings go
up, and then to have seen all this stop by order of Qadri.” (Gebelawi, Ch. 97)
“He got his full share of the estate revenue, and saw the buildings built in
Gabalawi’s name, and then stopped on Qadri’s orders.” (Alley, Ch. 97)

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

In addition to character names, the analysis looked into the collocation
1
of some high frequency words in the two translations . The events in the
novel all revolve around the people living in the “alley”, i.e. a symbolic
reference to earth, and a word which also appears in the title of the second
translation. The word “alley” is the second most frequently used noun
in both translations, with Theroux’s Alley using it 117 times more than
Gebelawi translation (Alley = 668 times / Gebelawi = 551 times). The
examples below illustrate the differences in the use of this word in the two
translations:

example (4)
،‫“وإذا بأصوات نساء تنطلق من النوافذ في ضوضاء غير متميزة ضاعت في ضوضاء المعركة‬
‫غير أن النساء بدون وهن يشرن بأيديهن في فزع تارة نحو طرف الحارة الشرقي وتارة نحو‬
”.‫الطرف اآلخر‬
“Women began shouting from the windows, but their cries were lost in the
noise of the battle. However, they could be seen pointing in horror, now to
the east and now to the west.” (Gebelawi, Ch. 90)
“Women’s voices now shrieked from windows, a noise that could not be
heard above the chaos of the battle, though they could be seen pointing in
terror, now to the east end of the alley, now to the other end.” (Alley, Ch.
90)

example (5)
‫ في كل مكان أسمع هذا‬:‫“لماذا عدت بنا إلى هذه الحارة؟ فقال عرفة واالبتسامة مازالت في شفتيه‬
”..‫ وهي الحارة الوحيدة التي يمكننا اإلقامة بها‬،‫الكالم وهذه حارتنا على أي حال‬
“Why did you bring us back to this place? Arafa went on smiling. I hear this
sort of talk everywhere, and anyway this is our Alley. It’s the only one we can
live in..” (Gebelawi, Ch. 93)
“Why did you bring us back to this alley?” his companion whispered irritably
in his ear.
Arafa smiled still as he answered. “I hear this kind of talk everywhere, and
anyway this is our alley, and this is the only alley we can live in.” (Alley, Ch.
93)

example (6)
‫ ثم سأله عن زبالة الحارة‬،‫”“وذهب حنش إلى مستوقد الصالحية وسأل عن زّبال حارة الجبالوي‬
“Hanash went to the furnace and found the garbage man of Gebelaawi Alley.
He asked him about the rubbish.” (Gebelawi, Ch. 114)

1 See Appendix for lists comparing the top 10 most frequent content words in the two translations.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

“And so Hanash went to the dump at Salihiya and asked for the Gabalawi
Alley garbageman and asked him about the trash from the alley.” (Alley, Ch.
114)
In those examples, we see the second translation Alley following the ST
more closely in its depiction of the “alley” as a central place in the narrative
represented by the frequent reference to it, unlike Stewart's translation who
was happy to omit or replace the noun “alley” in many instances. But the
differences do not stop there. Figures (10) and (11) below illustrate the
various collocations of this noun in the two translations:

Figure 10. Collocations of the noun “alley” in Gebelawi

The most noticeable feature is that in Gebelawi, the highest frequency
collocations of “alley” are in the form of modifiers which constitute almost
two thirds of these collocates. This is contrasted with the collocates in Alley,
where half of them are verbs for which the noun “alley” is a subject. So,
not only is the concept of “alley” more present in the second translation,
but it is also associated with more agency in the form of the number of
high frequency verbs which collocate with it. This is also highlighted in the
frequencies of other relevant n-gram structures such as “our alley”, “of the
alley” and “in the alley” as the chart below illustrates:

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Figure 11. Collocations of the noun “alley” in Alley

Figure 12. Frequency of “alley” and related structures in the two translations

6. Summary and discussion
The analysis in this study has computed several linguistic features at various
levels in the two translations in order to tease out their unique characteristics.
The main purpose is to illustrate how quantifiable features such as types,
tokens, hapax words, sentence length, lexical bundles, readability grades,
collocations, etc. can act as discovery tools for identifying patterns of
translator style. The results clearly highlight some stylistic divergences
between the two translations. This is a summary of the results:
Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

• Alley is a longer translation as it has more overall word count and
the word count by Chapter is higher in 64% of Chapters than
Gebelawi.
• Alley reflects higher lexical richness as it has 1000+ hapax words
more than Gebelawi, and the percentage of hapax words to overall
types (35%) is also higher than Gebelawi (21.7%)
• Alley has higher count and longer sentences, with the maximum
number of words in a sentence in Alley being 85, compared to 77 in
Gebelawi.
• Gebelawi has higher frequency and variety of the longer lexical
bundles (4 to 6 n-grams), and lexical bundles account for a higher
proportion of the overall text in Gebelawi compared to Alley.
• Alley has higher scores in 5 out of 9 readability tests (Flesch_kincaid,
Gunning_fog, Dale_chall, ARI and Linsear_write) indicating a
more difficult reading experience.
• Two of the stylometric analyses performed (PCA and
multidimensional scaling) clearly showed that both translations are
stylistically distinct, while two other computational experiments
(cluster analysis and bootstrap consensus tree) were inconclusive.
• Supervised machine learning techniques using top 100 words as
features can distinguish between the two translations.
• Alley refers to character names more frequently in line with the ST,
while Gebelawi uses more pronouns or deletion of character names.
• Alley has higher frequency of the noun “alley” and its relevant
n-grams (“the alley”, “our alley”, “in the alley”, “of the alley”)
compared to Gebelawi.
• Alley uses the noun “alley” as a subject with more verb collocates,
while Gebelawi uses the noun “alley” with more modifiers.
In order to interpret these results, we will have to refer to two factors working
in parallel: the concept of retranslation and the social context of producing
the two translations. In terms of lexical variety and richness, these results seem
to be consistent with assumptions regarding retranslations which are typically
produced in direct competition with an earlier translation. In this case, given
the copyright problems which engulfed the first translation and motivated
the need for a second one, it could be argued that the second translation
of Awlad Haratina was meant to be ‘better’, i.e. lexically richer, longer and
more stylistically appealing than the first. This is supported by the analysis
of word count, hapax words and sentence length which shows that Alley has
higher numbers in all of these categories.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Additionally, Alley also scored higher in 5 out of the 9 readability tests
applied in the study. These results reflect how the variables of vocabulary
and sentence structure can affect the readers’ experience while reading a
particular text. Although these tests employ different mathematical formulae
in measuring difficulty, they mostly rely on quantifiable features such as
word length, sentence length and frequency. Therefore, the results are not
only another indicator of differences in translators’ style, but they also tie in
with one of the early hypotheses on retranslations, i.e. that first translations,
compared to subsequent ones, are generally motivated by creating an easy
level of readability (Gambier 414). Therefore, the lower scores on the
readability tests for Gebelawi reflect a simpler, more manageable reading
experience, which is supported by a shorter text with lower lexical variety
and more frequent lexical bundles. Indeed, the translator himself implies
the intention to create an easy read as he says in the introduction to his
translation that it “is aimed at the general reader with no prior knowledge of
the Arab world; no words have been used that cannot be found in a good
English dictionary” (Stewart 59).
The only time Gebelawi scored higher was in the lexical bundles analysis.
Lexical bundles have been described as “building blocks” in discourse (Biber
and Barbieri 277) which have a statistical tendency to co-occur but are not
easily detectable without the aid of computers. Analysis of lexical bundles in
translation studies have been growing since Baker’s (Baker, “The Treatment
of Variation in Corpus-Based Translation Studies”) pioneering work, and
they have been considered a useful measure of linguistic differences between
translations of the same source text. According to Lee (382), translated texts
are expected to rely heavily on high-frequency lexical bundles “if they are
geared toward fluency and readability”. It seems that Gebelawi achieved this
as the analysis shows Stewart's translation was constructed as an easier text to
read. However, with the attention the Arabic novel gained in the post-Nobel
era, this perhaps put more pressure on the second translation to be different.
The focus seems to have shifted from creating an easy read to creating a
translation that is closer to the ST and one that is more stylistically nuanced.
In this sense, Theroux’s translation seems to fit in with the assumption
2
that retranslations are expected to be more attentive to the style of the ST
(Gürçağlar), as was also supported by the analysis of character names in the
two translations.
The distant reading approach, enabled by corpus analysis tools, was used
in this study to help in painting a clearer picture of the translators’ style
by tracing some of their linguistic thumbprints. We looked into the use
of character names and some high frequency words/structures to reveal

2 Although see Greenberg (202) who comments that Theroux’s translation “while a major accomplishment in translation, cannot help but

obscure some of the author’s more subtle tricks” in reference to the translation of certain culturally-complex lexical items such as mu’allim
(master) or futuwwa (strongman).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

a few differences between the translations. The analysis of these samples
from the text seem to show that Theroux’s translation follows the ST more
closely both in its depiction of characters and the centrality of the “alley”
in the narrative space as reflected in the frequency and distribution of these
linguistic items. The differences in the types of collocations of the word
“alley” in the two translations also shows that the concept of “the alley”
has more agency and dynamism in the second translation being the subject
of numerous verbs, while it collocates with more modifiers in the first
translation indicating a rather descriptive tone. This argument could be
perhaps extended to explain the change in the title itself from Children of
Gebelawi in the first translation to Children of the Alley in the second to be
seen as more than just a necessary differentiating feature of a re-translation.
That is, it could be perceived as projecting a focus of the narrative onto
the place as well as its people. While further analysis needs to be done
with regards to this point, these initial results are another indication of a
stylistically distinctive choice on part of the translators and can pave the way
for literary critics to support/refute their arguments.
Finally, the stylometric analysis of the two translations, which is based on
the distribution of the most frequent words in the texts (at chapter level),
showed that the two can be computationally distinguished in two of the tests
employed.Therefore, machine learning techniques were shown to successfully
distinguish between the two translations, and illustrated that textual metrics
are strong indicators of translator style in line with previous studies (e.g.
Lynch and Vogel, Claesen). Pooling all these quantitative results, this study
aims to show that computational and data-driven studies of translated texts
can complement descriptive studies which are grounded in literary or
translation theories and need to be interpreted within the larger social and
cultural contexts of the production and reception of the translation. In
this sense, it becomes increasingly important to “understand the specific
constraints, pressures and motivations that influence the act of translating
and underlie its unique language” as Laviosa (478) points out. That is why
the translation and retranslation of Awlad Haratina can be the perfect
example for the study of such constraints and pressures for which no single
factor can assume sole responsibility. This is a case of a novel laden with
claims of religious or political allegorical interpretations and with two
translations divided by a world-class prize that brought the ST to global
centre stage. Therefore, the language in both translations would surely be
influenced by multiple factors, which Pym (146) described as “the entourage
of patrons, publishers, readers and politics”. The quantitative study of these
two translations thus complements (Khalifa)'s focus on the sociology of
translation which includes an examination of the various agents involved
including the publishers, the translators and the paratext of both translations.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

7. Concluding remarks
Decades after the first publication of Awlad Haratina and after being
translated into many languages, it still proves to be a work of many
dimensions, and definitely one which defies one single interpretation.
According to Venuti (34), “translations are profoundly linked to their
historical moment”. This is truly the case with these two translations, which,
as many critics noted, are different because they were commissioned and
published in very different, yet equally stressful, circumstances thanks to
the controversy engulfing the source text. This study presented a corpusdriven stylistic analysis of the two English translations of Mahfouz's Awlad
Haratina with the aim to show that quantifying stylistic features in a
systematic way can shed some light on translator’s styles and contribute to
the study of retranslation in the context of this particular novel.
The very notion of translator style has proved to be an elusive phenomenon.
However, computational and corpus-driven studies have helped systematise
the study of style by isolating those linguistic features which can reveal the
translator’s thumbprints or, as Youdale (178) calls them, the “unconscious
translation habits”. Such habitual patterns of linguistic usage, examined
through variables such as frequency, word and sentence length, lexical
bundles, etc., provide a solid starting point for answering questions related
to both the production and reception of any translation, and especially in
the cases of comparing translations of the same text. Even when dealing with
such a giant figure in modern Arabic literature like Mahfouz and arguably his
most famous novel, this study wanted to show that a translation can never
simply be a vehicle for the reproduction of the authorial style of the ST.
By focusing on the texts of the two translations and teasing out the specific
patterns in their respective texts, the study hopes to contribute to the area
of computational translation stylistics in general and to studies of Awlad
Haratina in particular as a unique literary work both in its original language
and its translations.
Submitted: November 13, 2023 EDT, Accepted: December 13, 2023 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

works cited
Abu-Haidar, Jareer. “‘Awlad Haratina’ by Najib Mahfuz: An Event in the Arab World.” Journal of
Arabic Literature, vol. 16, no. 1, 1985, pp. 119–31. Crossref, https://doi.org/10.1163/
157006485x00112.
Allen, Roger. “The Happy Traitor: Tales of Translation.” Comparative Literature Studies, vol. 47,
no. 4, Jan. 2010, pp. 472–86, https://doi.org/10.5325/complitstudies.47.4.0472.
Baker, Mona. “Corpus Linguistics and Translation Studies: Implications and Applications.” Text
and Technology: In Honor of John Sinclair, edited by M. Baker et al., 1993, pp. 233–50.
---. “Retranslation as Rewriting.” Routledge Encyclopaedia of Translation Studies, edited by M.
Baker and G. Saldanha, Routledge, 2011, pp. 156–59.
---. “The Treatment of Variation in Corpus-Based Translation Studies.” Language Matters, vol. 35,
no. 1, Jan. 2004, pp. 28–38. Crossref, https://doi.org/10.1080/10228190408566202.
---. “Towards a Methodology for Investigating the Style of a Literary Translator.” Target.
International Journal of Translation Studies, vol. 12, no. 2, Dec. 2000, pp. 241–66. Crossref,
https://doi.org/10.1075/target.12.2.04bak.
Biber, Douglas, and Federica Barbieri. “Lexical Bundles in University Spoken and Written
Registers.” English for Specific Purposes, vol. 26, no. 3, Jan. 2007, pp. 263–86, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.esp.2006.08.003.
Biber, Douglas, et al. Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English. Longman London, 1999.
Boase-Beier, Jean. Stylistic Approaches to Translation. Routledge, 2014, https://doi.org/10.4324/
9781315759456.
Brownlie, Siobhan. “Narrative Theory and Retranslation Theory.” Across Languages and Cultures,
vol. 7, no. 2, Dec. 2006, pp. 145–70. Crossref, https://doi.org/10.1556/acr.7.2006.2.1.
Cachia, P. “Naguib Mahfouz: Children of Gebelawi (Book Review).” Journal of Arabic Literature,
vol. 14, no. 1, 1983, pp. 101–02, https://doi.org/10.1163/157006483x00123.
Chall, Jeanne S., and Edgar Dale. Readability Revisited: The New Dale-Chall Readability Formula.
1995.
Chesterman, Andrew. Memes of Translation: The Spread of Ideas in Translation Theory. John
Benjamins, 2004.
Claesen, Thomas. Style and Coordination in Literary Translation: A Case Study of the Coordination
Style in Joseph Roth’s Hotel Savoy and Its Two Dutch Translations. Ghent University Dissertation,
2014.
Cronin, Michael. Translation and Globalization. Routledge, 2003.
De Heus, Marije, and Djoerd Hiemstra. “Readability of the Web: A Study on 1 Billion Web Pages.”
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 986, 2013.
Eder, Maciej, et al. “Stylometry with R: A Package for Computational Text Analysis.” The R
Journal, vol. 8, no. 1, 2016, p. 107, https://doi.org/10.32614/rj-2016-007.
El-Fiqi, Heba, et al. “A Computational Linguistic Approach for the Identification of Translator
Stylometry Using Arabic-English Text.” 2011 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems
(FUZZ-IEEE 2011), June 2011, pp. 2039–45, https://doi.org/10.1109/fuzzy.2011.6007535.
El-Gabalawy, Saad. “The Allegorical Significance of Naguib Mahfouz’s Children of Our Alley.”
International Fiction Review, vol. 16, no. 2, 1989, pp. 91–97.
Ewais, K. “Najīb Mahfūz Rafada Iʿādat Tibāʿat Awlād Hāratinā Khawfan ʿalā Usratihi.” Al-Arabiya,
2006, http://www.alarabiya.net/articles/2006/08/30/27047.html.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

François, Thierry. “When Readability Meets Computational Linguistics: A New Paradigm in
Readability.” Revue Française de Linguistique Appliquée, vol. 20, no. 2, Nov. 2015, pp. 79–97,
https://doi.org/10.3917/rfla.202.0079.
Gambier, Yves. “La retraduction, retour et détour.” Meta, vol. 39, no. 3, 1994, p. 413,
https://doi.org/10.7202/002799ar.
Ghorab, Muhammad. One Text, Two Receptions: Mahfouz’s Children of the Alley. 2013. American
University of Sharjah, MA thesis.
Greenberg, Nathaniel. “Naguib Mahfouz’s Children of the Alley and the Coming Revolution.” The
Comparatist, vol. 37, no. 1, May 2013, pp. 200–18, https://doi.org/10.1353/com.2013.0020.
Gürçağlar, Şehnaz Tahir. “Retranslation.” Routledge Encyclopedia of Translation Studies, edited by
Mona Baker and Gabriela Saldanha, 3rd ed., Routledge, 2009, pp. 484–90, https://doi.org/
10.4324/9781315678627-103.
Hawthorne, Melanie. “Seasons of the Patriarch.” New York Times, 1996, https://www.nytimes.com/
1996/02/18/books/seasons-of-the-patriarch.html.
Hezam, Abdulrahman Mokbel. “Children of the Alley: Mahafouz’s Allegory of Violence and
Oppression.” Arab World English Journal (AWEJ), no. 3, 2016, pp. 86–94, https://doi.org/
10.2139/ssrn.2843960.
House, Juliane. “Beyond Intervention: Universals in Translation.” Trans-Kom, vol. 1, no. 1, 2008,
pp. 6–19.
Khalifa, Abdel-Wahab. “The Hidden Violence of Retranslation: Mahfouz’s Awlād Ḥāratinā in
English.” The Translator, vol. 26, no. 2, Apr. 2020, pp. 145–62, https://doi.org/10.1080/
13556509.2020.1751472.
---. The Socio-Cultural Determinants of Translating Modern Arabic Fiction into English: The
(Re)Translations of Naguib Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina. 2017. University of Leeds, Unpublished
Doctoral Dissertation.
Kilgarriff, Adam, et al. “The Sketch Engine: Ten Years On.” Lexicography, vol. 1, no. 1, July 2004,
pp. 7–36. Crossref, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40607-014-0009-9.
Kranich, Svenja, et al. “A Tentative Typology of Translation-Induced Language Change.”
Multilingual Discourse Production: Diachronic and Synchronic Perspectives, edited by Svenja
Kranich, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2011, pp. 11–44, https://doi.org/10.1075/
hsm.12.02kra.
Laviosa, Sara. “The Corpus-based Approach: A New Paradigm in Translation Studies.” Meta, vol.
43, no. 4, 1998, p. 474, https://doi.org/10.7202/003424ar.
Lee, Christopher. “Using Lexical Bundle Analysis as Discovery Tool for Corpus-Based Translation
Research.” Perspectives, vol. 21, no. 3, Sept. 2013, pp. 378–95, https://doi.org/10.1080/
0907676x.2012.657655.
Li, Defeng, et al. “Translator Style: A Corpus-Assisted Approach.” Corpus Methodologies Explained,
edited by Minghua Ji et al., Routledge, 2016, pp. 113–46.
Liu, Kanglong, and Muhammad Afzaal. “Translator’s Style Through Lexical Bundles: A CorpusDriven Analysis of Two English Translations of Hongloumeng.” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 12,
May 2021, pp. 1–10, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.633422.
Lundquist, Susanne. “Narrative Theory in Naguib Mahfouz’s The Children of Gebelawi.”
Understanding Others: Cultural and Cross-Cultural Studies and the Teaching of Literature, edited
by Joseph Trimmer and Tilly Warnock, 1992, pp. 213–29.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Lynch, Gerard, and Carl Vogel. “The Translator’s Visibility: Detecting Translatorial Fingerprints in
Contemporaneous Parallel Translations.” Computer Speech & Language, vol. 52, Nov. 2018, pp.
79–104. Crossref, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csl.2018.05.002.
Mahfouz, Naguib. Awlad Haratina. Dar Al-Adab, 1967.
---. Children of Gebelawi. Translated by Philip Stewart, Heinemann, 1981.
---. Children of the Alley. Translated by Paul Theroux, Doubleday, 1996.
Malmkjær, Kirsten. “Norms and Nature in Translation Studies.” Incorporating Corpora: The
Linguist and the Translator, edited by Gunilla Anderman and Margaret Rogers, Multilingual
Matters, 2007, pp. 49–59, https://doi.org/10.21832/9781853599873-007.
---. “What Happened to God and the Angels: An Exercise in Translational Stylistics.” Target.
International Journal of Translation Studies, vol. 15, no. 1, Nov. 2003, pp. 37–58,
https://doi.org/10.1075/target.15.1.03mal.
Mastropierro, Lucía. “Key Clusters as Indicators of Translator Style.” Target. International Journal
of Translation Studies, vol. 30, no. 2, Apr. 2018, pp. 240–59, https://doi.org/10.1075/
target.17040.mas.
Mathijssen, Jan Willem. The Breach and the Observance: Theatre Retranslation as a Strategy of
Artistic Differentiation, with Special Reference to Retranslations of Shakespeare’s Hamlet
(1777-2001. 2007. Utrecht University, PhD thesis.
Mauranen, Anna, and Pekka Kujamäki, editors. “Translation Universals.” Benjamins Translation
Library, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2004, https://doi.org/10.1075/btl.48.
Meier, Frederik, et al. “Exploring the Potential of Bootstrap Consensus Networks for Large-Scale
Authorship Attribution in Luxdorph’s Freedom of the Press Writings.” CEUR Workshop
Proceedings, vol. 2612, 2020.
Munday, Jeremy. “Systems in Translation: A Systemic Model for Descriptive Translation Studies.”
Crosscultural Transgressions: Research Models in Translation Studies II, Historical and Ideological
Issues, 2014, pp. 76–92.
Newmark, Peter. A Textbook of Translation. Prentice Hall, 1988.
Pym, Anthony. Method in Translation History. St. Jerome Publishing, 1998.
Roded, Ruth. “Gender in an Allegorical Life of Muḣammad: Mahfouz’s Children of Gebelawi.”
The Muslim World, vol. 93, no. 1, Jan. 2003, pp. 117–34, https://doi.org/10.1111/
1478-1913.00017.
Rodríguez Timaná, Luis Carlos, et al. “Software to Determine the Readability of Written
Documents by Implementing a Variation of the Gunning Fog Index Using the Google Linguistic
Corpus.” CCIS: Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol. 1193, 2020, pp.
409–20, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-42517-3_31.
Saldanha, Gabriela. “Translator Style: Methodological Considerations.” The Translator, vol. 17, no.
1, Apr. 2011, pp. 25–50, https://doi.org/10.1080/13556509.2011.10799478.
Shoair, M. Awlād Hāratinā: Sīrat al-Riwāyah al-Muharramah. Elain Publishing, 2018.
Snell-Hornby, Mary. “Translation Studies: An Integrated Approach.” Benjamins Translation
Library, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2006, https://doi.org/10.1075/btl.66.
Solnyshkina, Marina I., et al. “Evaluating Text Complexity and Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level.”
Journal of Social Studies Education Research, vol. 8, no. 3, 2017, pp. 238–48.
Stamatatos, Efstathios. “A Survey of Modern Authorship Attribution Methods.” Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, vol. 60, no. 3, 2009, pp. 538–56,
https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.21001.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Stewart, Philip. “A Tale of Two Translations.” Amazon.com, 2000, https://www.amazon.com/
review/R2O8JG3TZ22QVX.
Susam-Sarajeva, Şebnem. “Multiple-Entry Visa to Travelling Theory. Retranslations of Literary and
Cultural Theories.” Target, vol. 15, no. 1, Nov. 2003, pp. 1–36. Crossref, https://doi.org/
10.1075/target.15.1.02sus.
Theroux, Peter. “Children of the Alley: A Translator’s Tale.” The Massachusetts Review, vol. 42, no.
4, 2001, pp. 666–71.
---. “Naguib Mahfouz’s Children of the Alley.” The Middle East: A Guide to Politics, Economics,
Society and Culture, edited by Barry Rubin and M E Sharpe, 2012, pp. 399–401.
Torabi, Ali G., and Seyed H. Seyedi. “A Sociological Analysis of Naguib Mahfouz’s Works with a
Close Look at the Novel Children of Gebelawi (Awlad Haratana).” Rays of Criticism in Arabic
and Persian, vol. 4, no. 13, 2014, pp. 146–125.
Van Poucke, Piet. “Ageing as a Motive for Literary Retranslation: A Survey of Case Studies on
Retranslation.” Translation and Interpreting Studies, vol. 12, no. 1, Apr. 2017, pp. 91–115,
https://doi.org/10.1075/tis.12.1.05van.
Venuti, Lawrence. “Retranslations: The Creation of Value.” Bucknell Review, vol. 47, no. 1, 2004,
pp. 25–38.
---. The Translator’s Invisibility: A History of Translation. Routledge, 2004.
Wang, Shan, et al. “Readability Is Decreasing in Language and Linguistics.” Scientometrics, vol. 127,
no. 8, July 2022, pp. 4697–729, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-022-04427-1.
Winters, Maeve. A Corpus-Based Study of Translator Style: Oeser’s and Orth-Guttmann’s German
Translations of F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Beautiful and Damned. 2005. Dublin City University,
PhD thesis.
Youdale, Robert. Using Computers in the Translation of Literary Style: Challenges and Opportunities.
Routledge, 2019, https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429030345.
Zanettin, Federico. “Corpus Methods for Descriptive Translation Studies.” Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 95, Oct. 2013, pp. 20–32, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.618.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

29

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

Appendix
(a) Top 10 nouns in both translations.
Gebelawi (Stewart)

Alley (Theroux)

man

619

man

693

alley

551

alley

668

people

497

gabal

527

gebel

494

people

432

House

440

qassem

425

qaasim

426

House

414

strongman

376

rifaa

401

rifaa

343

adham

354

adham

341

eye

351

eye

323

voice

290

(b) Top 10 adjectives in both translations.
Gebelawi (Stewart)

Alley (Theroux)

good

289

good

282

old

143

other

137

other

119

old

131

first

102

long

109

bad

99

own

107

great

89

first

106

afraid

85

same

90

own

82

only

82

more

79

little

79

long

75

afraid

76

(c) Top 10 verbs in both translations.
Gebelawi (Stewart)

Alley (Theroux)

be

5391

be

5378

have

1818

have

1788

say

1537

say

1430

do

1170

do

1323

go

802

go

645

come

538

come

497

see

418

see

437

look

410

know

367

know

359

look

362

ask

342

ask

356

Journal of Cultural Analytics

30

Two translations of Mahfouz’s Awlad Haratina (Children of our Alley): A computational-stylistic analysis

(d) Top 10 adverbs in both translations.
Gebelawi (Stewart)

Alley (Theroux)

not

1499

not

1418

then

493

then

411

back

309

so

311

as

275

as

285

so

256

back

267

only

203

even

245

away

176

never

213

now

146

only

203

all

146

now

195

even

143

here

174

Journal of Cultural Analytics

31

