Journal of
Cultural Analytics

January 14, 2020

Fleshing Out Models of Gender in
English-Language Novels (1850 – 2000)
Jonathan Y. Chenga
a

University of Nebraska, Lincoln

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Peer-Reviewed By: Hoyt Long, Laura Mandell

Distant readers have used predictive modelling to study the strength of the relationship

Article DOI: 10.22148/001c.11652

between characterization and binary notions of gender. This essay builds on that research,

Dataverse DOI: 10.7910/DVN/QUGW8V
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549

shedding light on several historical trends concerning anatomical description and its
relationship to gender. Some of the evidence suggests that bodily language has long played
a larger role in configuring fictional women than it did for fictional men. Other evidence
implies that bodily characteristics were increasingly bifurcated along a gender binary,
reflecting how characters are more and more physically sorted along a feminine-masculine
axis. Taken altogether, this essay unpacks a suggestive correlation: a growing aspect of
characterization was increasingly imbricated in heteronormative discourses. By weighing
the discrepancies between the evidence presented in this essay, and that of its predecessors,
this essay will ultimately suggest that disaggregating statistical models can unfold patterns
of literary change that would otherwise remain suppressed.

Introduction
Recent computational work has analyzed the significance of gender in
characterization, investigating whether character descriptions are often sorted along
a feminine-masculine axis. Matthew Jockers and Gabi Kirilloff, for instance,
tabulate pronoun-verb pairings, exploring the connection between characters’
actions and their gendered representation in nineteenth-century novels.1 They show
evidence of a stable relationship between gendered pronouns and the verbs they
perform.2 Ted Underwood, David Bamman, and Sabrina Lee explore a broader range
of words used in characterization, measuring the difference between the words
describing fictional men and those describing fictional women. Their evidence
shows that the implicit differences between gendered characters gradually becomes
less clear over the past two centuries. While the former study argues that characters’
actions reveal gender’s steady prominence, the latter research posits that those
overarching gender divisions are broadly diminishing.3 But these seemingly
disparate arguments should not be taken as contradictory. Rather, these varying

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

conclusions should reinforce a more complicated sense of how “some forms of
gender differentiation…are declining while other forms…are on the rise.”4 To
further explore the varying degrees and modes of gender differentiation, I employ
quantitative methods to investigate gender’s role in the description of characters’
bodies.
It is difficult to overstate the significance of the body in scholarly accounts of gender.
Laura Mulvey famously uses the representation of women’s bodies to articulate her
well-known thesis about the male gaze in cinema. The cinematic representation of
women’s bodies, for Mulvey, reflects how women are often restrictively configured
to be “looked at and displayed, with their appearance coded for strong visual and
erotic impact, so that they can be said to connote to-be-looked-at-ness.”5 That thesis
has extended well beyond cinema, shedding light on various heteronormative
strategies, physically representing women as sexual objects for a male viewer. In a
related way, Butler uses that sort of reductive embodiment to pursue her well-known
critique of the sexed body as an asocial phenomenon. Anatomical representations of
the body, for Butler, reflect how intensely gender norms can often be presented as a
purely biological configuration. She asks readers to critically rethink how the body
can come “into being in and through the mark(s) of gender? How do we reconceive
the body no longer as a passive medium?”6 By reframing the sexed body as a socially
constructed object, Butler’s framework has been foundational to a wide range of
feminist and queer critiques of heteronormative strategies. And this is all to say that
scholarly work on gender has often centered on representations of the body, because
anatomical description has historically reflected one of the most rigid applications
of gender norms.
This essay contributes to that ongoing research, analyzing anatomical
characterization throughout a collection of about 13,000 English-language novels.7
By producing a model of gender based solely on characters’ physical features, I
explore the extent that anatomical description is defined along a feminine-masculine
axis. And I pursue two central claims that complicate existing models of character
and gender. The first is that bodily description becomes an increasingly prominent
aspect of characterization.8 My analysis shows that an increasing proportion of
character description is devoted to the bodies of both fictional men and women.
Moreover, there is evidence that those details have long played a larger role in the
2

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

representation of women. Secondly, those characteristics have increasingly been
deployed along gendered lines until only very recently. As we move towards the
twenty-first century, men and women are increasingly embodied using different
words. Even seemingly innocuous bodily features such as “sight” or “clasping one’s
hands” function as signs of gender.
By showing evidence that gender remains a prominent force in anatomical
characterization, I complicate Underwood et al.’s argument that gendered
differences were overall becoming less rigid. As I mentioned earlier, they model the
relationship between character and gender more broadly, looking at a wider swath
of words used in characterization. And, to be fair, they do concede that certain
aspects of character might have been gendered to different degrees.9 My model leans
on that anecdotal intuition, yielding evidence that the anatomical and sexual
dimensions of gender have instead become increasingly conventional until more
recently. But I don’t want that evidence to seem like it displaces Underwood et al.’s
findings. We want to see both the overarching trend as well any significant
deviations. Instead, I’ll argue that their analysis is a little too quick to aggregate the
strength of gender stereotypes into a single model. Ultimately, I’ll conclude that
disaggregating such models can unfold suppressed patterns of literary change.
For now, it is enough to say that my two claims form a suggestive parallel: as the
body becomes an expanding aspect of characterization, that dimension is
increasingly organized along gendered lines. By showing that an increasingly
conventional mode of representing characters is also becoming more and more
gendered, I demonstrate how quantitative approaches to gender benefit from
modelling particular subsets of characterization. Moreover, on a formal register, this
work also adds to scholarship on the novel, providing new evidence of the practices
used in characterization.

Methods and Limitations
In order to gather the words describing each character, one first needs to tell the
computer which words are describing which characters. Bamman et al.’s BookNLP

3

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

pipeline has worked well for similar problems, so I modified their process for my
own purposes.10 The preprocessing narrative is as follows:11
First, I implement a process called coreference resolution to locate character names
in each text and identify any expressions that also refer to the same fictional person.
Image 1 provides an example output of this process and reflects what coreference
resolution produces:

Image 1. Output of coreference resolution. TID reflects location in text. Pronouns and proper nouns are connected
to single entity.

In this example, we have instances of the pronouns “she” and “her.” Coreference
resolution uses several linguistic rules to determine that those pronouns refer to the
character “Elizabeth,” treating each of those pronouns as different references to the
same person. As a result, we can catalog several instances when a character gets
mentioned in a text, and we can do this for each character in each text (regardless of
whether they are mentioned via proper noun or a pronoun). But now we want to find
any words connected to each reference to a character. Doing that allows us to record
which words have been used to describe which person.
So secondly, to that end, I use a process called dependency parsing to identify a
variety of words connected to each character-reference. This is a process that
establishes relationships between words in each sentence, allowing us to determine
which words are connected to which characters.12 I do this for each sentence
containing a character coreference. Following Bamman et al.’s model of character,
I extract all of the actions a character performs, the actions that they’re the object of,
any adjectives modifying them, and any nouns they govern (such as body parts, like
“his hands”). Moreover, for the purposes of this inquiry, I add onto their character
model by extracting additional words that physically describe each character.
Whenever a character’s body part is mentioned, “his hands” for instance, I also
gather the verbs and adjectives modifying their bodily features, such as “his hands
4

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

grasped” or “her blue eyes.”13 As a result, I get a frequency table of the words used
to describe each character in each novel. In effect, this process tabulates the same
words as Bamman et al.’s model, but it additionally collects the words attributed to
their physical features. Image 2 is an example output of using dependency parsing
to locate words connected to each character:

Image 2. Output after coreference resolution and dependency parsing to extract words describing a character.

This approach is, however, just one way to explore physical description. In practice,
this method analyzes the anatomical features a character possesses, the actions those
features perform, the actions that those body parts receive, and any adjectives
attributed to them. And this definition privileges a material definition of the body,
as it sometimes suppresses the metaphorical or psychosomatic instances of bodily
language. If we take two passages from Stephen King’s Salem’s Lot, for instance,
the tradeoffs of this approach become more clear.14 In some scenes, a young boy’s
fear gets rendered almost entirely through anatomical description:
Blood thudded in his temples. His hands were cold… Terror like hot iron
leaped into Danny’s chest. Wires seemed to have run up his legs…Danny held
his brother’s hand and they began to walk. His legs felt as if they were made
up of ten thousand pencil erasers. His knees were trembling. (Emphasis is
added to show the kinds of words extracted using this method.)
This method loses some of King’s more metaphorical expressions, but it does
capture how Danny Glick’s “cold hands,” “trembling knees,” and “thudding blood”
5

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

are used to represent this character’s fear. That’s not at all a bad approximation of
Danny’s physical terror. But let us consider another example of physical description
that completely gets suppressed in this approach:
“‘No, Danny. Really. Can’t you feel it?’ Danny stopped. And in the way of
children, he did feel something and knew they were no longer alone. A great
hush had fallen over the woods; but it was a malefic hush. Shadows, urged by
the wind, twisted languorously around them.”
Even without mentioning any of Danny’s physiological features, the scene’s
suspense relies on the reader’s sense of Danny’s physical and mental dread. The
anatomical approach employed here will only indirectly address the psychological
aspects of bodily description (e.g. her skin crawled, his spine tingled), and it will
only include these instances when signaled by an anatomical feature. This approach,
however, has the advantage of consistently extracting moments of anatomical
description, allowing us to raise questions about how the material body is used to
represent gender.
This essay also operationalizes previously employed assumptions about gender.
Like previous studies on character, this essay treats gender in a Butlerian sense, as
conventional roles that people –fictional or real– were expected to publicly perform
in order to remain legible within heteronormative contexts. As such, authors and
characters are labelled as either feminine, masculine, or unknown. Those labels, of
course, do not capture the complexity of gender identity, but they can be used to help
illuminate the socially pervasive and stereotypical representations of gender.15
Additionally, given that the history of sexed bodies is often associated with the
enforcement of rigid gender norms, those labels are appropriate for exploring that
particular history. Future research can (and should) complicate this model, and I
provide a starting point for those critiques.
Like previous research on gender’s significance in characterization, my method
comes with its own technological challenges. In order to separate characters from
each other and assign them gender identities, I use Lincoln Mullen’s Gender package
to label those names with a grammatical gender.16 Mullen’s package uses U.S and
North Atlantic census data to accurately predict gender of first names, accounting
for shifts in time and geographic location. The problem with using proper names to
6

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

identify character, however, is that characters referred to by generic nouns are
excluded, such as “the baker.” This pipeline attempts to account for this by including
characters signaled by stereotypically gendered nouns, such as “the queen” or “the
father,” but this does not comprehensively account for many of the generic nouns
used to produce characters. Moreover, this study also does not provide any robust
solutions to the first-person narrator problem. The pronoun “I” does not consistently
connote a clear gender identity, so anatomical descriptions of first-person characters
are excluded from this essay. As such, there are certain kinds of characters whose
physical features will not be counted in this study.

Embodying Fictional Men and Women, 1850 – 2000
This essay analyzes characters’ physical descriptions throughout 13,000 Englishlanguage novels, and their publication dates range from 1850 to 2000.17 Most of this
corpus was developed by the Chicago Text Lab, covering the period from 1880 to
2000. Other novels were curated by the Stanford Literary Lab, covering the period
from 1750 to 1900. However, most of the novels span from 1850 to 2000, so that is
where I will focus my analysis. This sample of novels will largely reflect the
purchasing practices of academic libraries. This can certainly tell us a lot about the
patterns of physical description underlying the literary history studied in universities.
But this collection of texts will exclude representations of the body that were
pervasive in other modes of publication, such as magazines and newspapers. There
are a few other aspects of these corpora that can help readers raise further questions
and help contextualize the findings of this article. To that end, I’ve provided an
appendix with some relevant metadata about the corpora further below.18
As we continue to develop more robust samples of literary history, this sample of
13,000 novels can, at the very least, make it possible to explore some of the more
prominent trends in characterization. For example, we have several different theories
about the extent that characterizing men and women relied on anatomical
description, and there is an unclear sense of how best to navigate those disparate
expectations. On the one hand, we have some intuitions about the overall space
afforded to fictional women. Underwood et al. have shed light on a discouraging
story about the steadily diminishing space afforded to female characters over the
7

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

past two centuries.19 That diminishment might lead one to expect that the physical
description of women would similarly decline. On the other hand, there is also a
sense that bodily language was steadily becoming more important to fiction. Ryan
Heuser and Long Le-Khac have shown that body parts were becoming more and
more conventional in nineteenth-century British novels.20 It would also be
reasonable then to expect more physical description for both female and male
characters. But then, if we follow feminist research about the intense objectification
of women’s bodies, it’s also reasonable to expect that an increasing amount of
physical description gets attributed to women. On top of that, there are also
hypotheses about increasing masculine anxieties regarding physical appearance,
which could lead one to expect that the body was becoming more central to
describing men.21
We can start to untangle these various hypotheses by asking a simple question: is the
percentage of characterization, that is bodily description, different between fictional
men and women? Exploring this question helps us see whether the body becomes a
larger proportion of characterizing men or women. Let’s start by taking the number
of words physically describing female characters and divide that by the number of
all words describing those characters. Then we perform that calculation for each
year. In effect, we’re just plotting the proportion of words describing women that
are about their bodies.22 The same calculation is also performed for the fictional men.
Once we have those proportions, for each year, and for both men and women, we
can compare those proportions to see if there are any clear gendered differences.
That comparison is plotted below in Figure 1.

8

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Figure 1. The percentage of words used in characterization connected to characters’ physical features. Separated
out by character gender.

Two clear long-term patterns emerge. First, body language becomes a growing
aspect of all characters as we get closer to the twenty-first century. Over time, more
and more of the words used in characterization concern the body. If we want to
describe the direction and strength of that trend, we can measure their correlation
and measure the rate of that change. Those descriptive statistics are provided below
in Table 1.
Correlated with
Publication Year

r

p-value

slope

Percentage of Physical
Description of Men

0.88239

2.2e-16

0.060010

Percentage of Physical
Description of Women

0.80049

2.2e-16

0.029894

Table 1. Correlations between publication year and proportion of physical description. P-value shown for statistical significance.
Slope shown to provide sense of rate of increase. Separated by character gender.

9

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

Given that the correlations (r) are both above 0.8, we have reason to suspect that
there is a very strong relationship between the two variables, suggesting that the
proportion of bodily characterization does grow as we move forward to the present.23
And, given that we’re looking at small slopes, we’re also looking at a gradual (yet
steady) change in characterization. Even though that rate of change seems
marginally incremental, this adds up over 150 years. For fictional men in this corpus,
the percentage of physical description grows from 7% to about 15%. So, when it
comes to characterizing men, the amount of physical description has nearly doubled.
For fictional women, that percentage grows from around 12% to about 17%,
suggesting that nearly one-fifth of the words about women have become about their
bodies.
Readers will also note that the magnitude of this change seems to vary across the
two centuries. More specifically, there appears to be a rapid growth in the physical
description of men from the 1880s to the 1900s. But I’d caution that this jump might
be an artifact of the data, rather than a real cultural effect. If we look at the rate of
growth before that cliff, the incline looks much more gradual (For men: 0.040943,
For women: 0.000438). Given the strength of the correlation, we’re still looking at
a steady growth in bodily description, but we’ll want some clarification about that
spike at the turn of the century. Instead of a literary or social explanation, one
potential reason for that uptick is that this is where the data shifts from the Stanford
corpus to the Chicago one. The Chicago corpus begins right at 1880, which is around
when we see a sudden increase in an otherwise gradual pattern. If this is indeed the
case, then there’s reason to doubt a dramatic shift at the close of the nineteenth
century, leaving us with a story of gradual change.
So, on the one hand, Figure 1 reflects a well-known story: the body becomes a
growing aspect of producing characters. These two slopes provide further evidence
of Heuser’s and Le-Khac’s claim that the body becomes steadily more important in
fiction. This isn’t to claim that the body was becoming the most important aspect of
character. Andrew Piper, for example, has provided evidence that signs of interiority
(such as acts of thinking, reflection, and sense perception) are a distinctive feature
of female characters in nineteenth-century novels written by women.24 And this isn’t
to say that the body was only growing in importance in the past two centuries.
There’s a lot of evidence to the contrary.25 This is just to say that, since the 1850s,
10

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

more and more space for describing characters has been allocated to their physical
features, appearances, and gestures.
“So why did the body become increasingly prominent in novels?” While I will not
pose any causal hypotheses for this trend, literary scholars have already produced a
wide range of literary and social explanations. On a literary register, scholarly
accounts of the novel tend to associate participation in realism with a commitment
to minute physical details, such as bodily characteristics. Fredric Jameson, at the
very least, sees the construction of a “secular or bourgeois body” as one of the central
projects of realism in the nineteenth century.26 Configuring the body, for Jameson,
was necessary, because physical sensations and sensory perceptions produced an
affective immediacy, allowing realism to feel urgently present. Which is to say that
Figure 1 could reflect theories about changing literary ideals.
On a more cultural register, however, other scholars correlate the body’s growing
prominence to a variety of cultural shifts. The breadth of research on this subject is
difficult to cover. Catherine Gallagher, for example, approaches the body in
literature as an economic phenomenon. Her work focuses on the tendency of market
discourses to emphasize physical expressions as signs of economic happiness, seeing
its resonance in the characters of Victorian novels.27 Focusing more on scientific
discourses, Lucy Hartley correlates an increasing attention to facial expressions to
professional and social investments in physiognomic debates. Hartley’s research
describes how interpretive debates about facial expressions figured their way into
literary practices.28 There are, of course, several other ways to tell the story of the
body and characterization. While Figure 1 cannot verify each one of those different
hypotheses, it does align with a general sense that the body has become more
important over the past two centuries. And, perhaps excitingly, this picture also
reflects how that growing prominence has yet to conclude.
But there’s another significant story to come out of Figure 1: physical description
consistently tends to be a larger proportion of characterizing women than men. In
fact, as we move from the 1850s to the 2000s, at no point is the proportion of bodily
description greater for men. The pattern remains intact even when physical
characteristics were becoming more prominent for all characters. This evidence
suggests that the body has historically played a larger role in representing women.
That’s an important detail about literary history, because it underscores the extent
11

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

that women’s physical descriptions are imbricated in gender discourses. Feminist
scholars have, of course, already captured important parts of this story. Butler’s
argument about gendered bodies, for instance, hinges upon her claim that there are
“cultural associations of mind with masculinity and body with femininity.”29 The
evidence in Figure 1 doesn’t completely verify a rigid alignment of men with the
mind and women with the body. Rather, it is congruent with the latter part of Butler’s
claim, showing that the representation of women tends to rely more heavily on
bodily description.
Are those two patterns, however, broadly consistent across all novels? I have shown
that fictive women are, proportionally, configured with more body language than
men. But it is entirely possible that certain kinds of novels, or those written by a
particular demographic, embody men and women to different degrees. Along
Mulveyian lines, for instance, one could reasonably suspect that books by men have
a stronger tendency to focus on women’s bodies. Moreover, given that my corpus
does contain more male authors, we’ll want to see whether the patterns in Figure 1
persist among different demographics. We can explore this possibility by separating
the proportions in Figure 1 by author-gender. In other words, we’re seeing if the
proportion of physical characterization dramatically changes when we separate
books written by men and those by women. When we perform that analysis, we are
confronted with a broader historical pattern. That analysis is plotted below in Figures
2 and 3.

12

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Figure 2. The percentage of body language used in characterization, in books by women.

Figure 3. The percentage of body language used in characterization, in books by men.

13

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

There are some very subtle differences between those two images, but they broadly
tend to mirror the patterns we saw earlier in Figure 1. We can again calculate
correlations to describe the direction and strength of these trends, and we can also
calculate slopes to see any major difference in rates of change.

Correlation with
Publication Year

r

p-value

slope

Percentage of Physical
Description of Men in
Books by Women

0.7349

2.2e-16

0.061635

Percentage of Physical
Description of Women in
Books by Women

0.3475

2.2e-16

0.029894

Percentage of Physical
Description of Men in
Books by Men

0.734

2.2e-16

0.058309

Percentage of Physical
Description of Women in
Books by Men

0.5737

2.2e-16

0.034156

Table 2. Correlations between publication year and proportion of physical description. P-value shown for statistical
significance. Slope shown to provide sense of rate of increase. Separated out by author and character-gender.

What immediately stands out in Table 2 is that the direction of these trends is the
same, but the strength of the correlation between publication year and percentage of
physical description wanes. Some of that instability is to be expected, as we have
split a larger sample of novels into two smaller samples. However, the correlation
has dropped a fair amount for female characters written by women (a drop from
0.80049 to 0.3475). This could be due to the decrease in sample size. But that sharp
decline could also suggest that, in female authored novels, there is a less poignant
14

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

relationship between historical progression and the amount of physical description
attributed to women. Moreover, Table 2 could also suggest that the growing amount
of prose on women’s bodies we saw earlier might have been more prominent in
books by men. The slightly higher rate of change in books by men (0.0341 to
0.029894) could also be evidence of this trend.
But the margins are subtle enough that we ought to resist immediate interpretation.
At the very least, it seems safe to say that both graphs appear to reflect the two
overarching patterns exhibited in Figure 1. This isn’t to suggest that female and male
authors embody their characters in the same way. I will soon present evidence that
argues otherwise. Rather, it reflects how the growing prominence of physical
description, and its relatively greater importance to characterizing women, seems to
flow more broadly across the novels contained in this corpus.
If those patterns prove durable, they lead to several interesting questions about the
embodiment of men and women. If we take the Butlerian line, one question
immediately stands out, “to what extent were women culturally associated with the
body?” I have shown that fictive women are consistently composed of more physical
description than fictive men. That’s a start, as a consistent 5-10% margin isn’t
negligible evidence. Moreover, this evidence also aligns with previous research, so
multiple approaches lend weight to that association. Underwood et al. has shown
how the words “lips, eyes, face, and voice are all associated with women…body
itself, in fact, is gendered feminine” (Underwood et. al). Those anecdotal examples
present individual instances where body parts appear to align with female characters.
But, on the other hand, we will want other forms of social and quantitative evidence
to see if the pattern resurfaces in different genres. If, for instance, the pattern persists
in poetry and other forms of fiction, then it would be much more difficult to argue
against an association between femininity and the body. Realistically, more research
is needed. For now, we have evidence of the gendered distribution of bodily
description. That’s exciting, because we can now start to ask more direct questions
about the gendering of the physical characteristics themselves.

15

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

Gendering the Body
We have seen evidence that bodily description is allocated an increasing amount of
space in characterization. We’ve also seen that the body is consistently a greater
proportion of characterizing women than it is of men. But neither of those sheds light
on the extent that the physical features themselves are allocated along gendered
lines. In short, it’s unclear whether fictive men and women are embodied using
different body parts, gestures, and attributes. Moreover, it’s unclear whether those
differences are allocated to a rigidly consistent degree. And, because we have seen
that the body becomes an increasingly prominent aspect of character, we’ll want a
sense of the extent that bodily features were gendered across the timeline. To explore
that history, we can start by asking two simple questions: Were fictive men
embodied in different ways than fictive women? And does the strength of that
difference change as we move towards the twenty-first century?
In order to explore those questions, binary classification methods have proven
effective at modelling the strength of social categories.30 At its core, this method
tests to see how well individual samples can be sorted into two related categories. In
our case, we want to test whether bodily nouns, verbs, adjectives, etc. are
consistently attributed to either fictive men or women. This means, first, taking
multiple random samples of characters from each decade, tabulating the words that
physical describe them. Then, each of those words is labelled with the character’s
grammatical gender. By showing a model many of these labelled words, we train it
to develop a stereotypical sense of what attributes constitute a stereotypically
“feminine” or “masculine” body in that decade. Finally, we instruct the model to use
its sense of gendered bodies to make gender predictions about characters it hasn’t
seen yet. If, for instance, physical characteristics are predominantly distributed along
gendered lines, this will allow the model to consistently make accurate gender
predictions. On the other hand, if body language and gender are generally unrelated,
then the model will be less capable of accurately inferring a character’s gender from
that language.
What can we expect to see? Once again, it’s hard to say. On the one hand, previous
research has shown that several differences between fictive men and women have
diminished over time. Underwood et al. uses a similar classification method to show
16

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

that “the implicit differences between masculine and feminine characters get steadily
harder to discern from the middle of the nineteenth century to the beginning of the
twenty-first” (Underwood et al.) Moving from that evidence, one could reasonably
assume that the same is true for bodily characteristics. But, anecdotally, that feels
like a hard sell. If we restrict characters to bodily imagery, intuitively, it’s hard to
imagine gender as a diminishing force. Though, with Underwood et al.’s evidence,
one can hope that those intuitions give way to subtle pushbacks against embodied
notions of gender.
We see two overarching patterns below in Figure 4. Up until the 1960s, the model
gradually has an easier time inferring the gender of characters from their physical
characteristics. During that period, the model’s percentage of correct gender
predictions rises from about 76% to about 83%. What this suggests is that words
describing the body are becoming increasingly bifurcated along normative gender
lines. After the 1960s, however, the percentage of correct predictions drops back
down to roughly 77% as we reach the 2000s. This would suggest that the model was
less and less able to use body language to correctly infer a character’s gender. This
would also suggest that the bodily differences between fictive men and women has
only more recently begun to diminish.

Figure 4. Model’s accuracy at inferring gender from bodily descriptors. 7200 characters drawn from two corpora
of novels, 225 men and 225 women sampled in each decade.

17

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

More quantitative evidence will, of course, be needed to feel confident about these
figures, but this approach takes a few steps in order to test the strength of this pattern.
This figure was produced by running fifteen different models within each decade.
Each of those models is produced by randomly selecting 450 characters at a time
(225 men and 225 women), classifying them using the top ten percent of the most
commonly occurring words in each sample.31 These steps help ensure that we’re
making fair comparisons between uniform samples. This winnowing strategy comes
at the cost of ignoring less frequent physical descriptions. For example, when it
comes to describing eye-color, the adjective “hazel” is less common than “black,”
“brown,” or “blue,” so it is often excluded from each model. These sparse features
can certainly be significant signs of gender, but the benefit of this approach is that it
analyzes gender’s prominence within pervasively deployed physical features, such
as having a “nose” or being attributed with “brown” hair.
The patterns in Figure 4 complicate Underwood et al.’s evidence of a steady decline
in the gendering of characters, and this discrepancy merits further unpacking.32 On
the one hand, this pattern does align with their research in a clear way. From the
1960s forward, we see that the models in Figure 4 become decreasingly accurate at
inferring a character’s gender from body language, suggesting that the representation
of men’s and women’s bodies has steadily become less different over time. In this
regard, both studies do provide evidence of diminishing gender divisions. Before
1950, however, this picture tells a different story. The classifier’s improving
accuracy suggests that embodied gender differences were instead becoming steadily
sharper. Taken altogether, the evidence I present suggests that a growing aspect of
character was also becoming increasingly gendered.
This raises an interesting question for distant reading: how do we want to interpret
the discrepancy between these two pieces of quantitative evidence? I would argue
that Underwood et al. are too quick to aggregate “the strength of gender stereotypes”
into a single unified trend. This sort of “aggregation bias” has become a concern for
data scientists, because a generalized model can sometimes draw misleading
conclusions about its various subgroups. In the field of medicine, for instance, how
a condition behaves in the overall population can be very different from the way it
behaves in specific demographics, and we don’t want doctors to overlook those
subpopulations when diagnosing patients.33 In the field of literary criticism,
18

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

however, a generalized model can be unfolded to explore complicated stories of
historical change. Disaggregating Underwood et al.’s model, for example, sheds
light on an aspect of representation that has a particular historical relationship to
gender. By demonstrating how those particularities impact the way we draw
historical trendlines, we can produce new evidence of literary change through a
critique of existing models. Taken altogether, we’re not dealing with contradicting
pieces of evidence where one model subsumes the other. Instead, we’re looking at
two different scales of analysis, uncovering related patterns that have, at times,
moved in opposite directions. By unfolding generalized models, we can concretize
different cultural perspectives by comparing their effect on the historical record.
If we set aside larger methodological reflections for now, there are several scholarly
accounts of literary history that help to explain gender’s growing prominence in
bodily description. Kate Flint, for instance, explores the expanding popularity of
natural philosophy in the late-eighteenth and early-nineteenth centuries. As more
attention gets paid to the eye’s anatomy, new uncertainties emerged about the
functional symbolic capacity of the human eye. That uncertainty lead to explicitly
gendered theories about how the eye operated differently for men and women.
Popularizers of natural philosophy, such as Joseph Turnley, would claim that “‘the
eye of man is the most firm; woman’s the most flexible…Man’s surveys and
observes; woman’s glances’” (emphasis added).34 These sort of physiological
arguments were central to configurations of biological sex and could be one
explanation for Figure 4.
But I should also impress that scientific discourses were not the only aspect of
culture that embodied gender divisions. Peter J. Capuano reminds us that etiquette
manuals are constantly preoccupied with the bodily behaviors of women. For
Capuano, that preoccupation about women’s hand gestures aligns with the class
conflicts emerging out of Britain’s industrialization.35 In those conflicts, surveilling
women’s physical manners was one strategy for landowners to differentiate
themselves from the rising professional class. According to Capuano, that strategy
(and its subversion) find its way into the social drama of Victorian novels,
distinguishing wealthy women from other people.36 Both of these scholarly accounts
describe how physical characteristics, whether they be eyes or hands, were becoming

19

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

a significant site of gender differentiation. And the evidence displayed in Figure 4
aligns with those claims while extending their effects to the mid-twentieth century.
But do books by men and women gender bodily characteristics to the same degree?
We saw in Figure 4 that inferring gender from characters’ bodily features gets easier
until around the 1960s. Exploring whether that pattern varies throughout different
groups of novels can tell us a lot about that historical arc. One can imagine, for
instance, a historical arc where books by men tend to deploy bodily characteristics
along gendered lines more often than books by women. There are hints of that kind
of story in Underwood et al.’s research. When they compare the degree of gender
differentiation in books by men and in books by women, they find that the divide
between fictive men and women is slightly more apparent in stories written by men.
Intuitively, along Mulveyian lines, it seems reasonable to expect a similar story when
we narrow our analysis to just bodily description. The following picture, however,
underscores how dramatically apparent embodied divisions are in male authored
novels. When we compare the difference between fictive men’s and women’s bodies
in only books by men, and the difference only in books by women, the models
trained on books by men often tend to be more accurate (by 7% on average).37 This
is especially true, during the twentieth century, when several of those models report
more than 90% accuracy, suggesting that there is a sharp divide between fictive
men’s and women’s bodies in novels by men.

20

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Figure 5. Model’s accuracy at inferring gender from bodily characteristics. Those accuracies are separated out by
author gender. Classification parameters same as in Figure 4.

There’s another curious detail about this picture that will require future research to
fully map out its implications. The models trained on books only written by men,
and those trained on books only by women, are more accurate at inferring gender
than the initial models trained on both groups of authors. On average, the initial
models were 80% accurate at inferring gender (Figure 4). Whereas models trained
only on books by men were 87% accurate while those trained only on books by
women were 83% accurate (Figure 5). Those aren’t large disparities. We should also
remember that it is unclear whether a 3-7% difference in accuracy is culturally
significant. But those differences could suggest that discerning gender divisions
becomes slightly easier when we isolate the writing tendencies of varying groups of
authors. One could imagine, for instance, that embodied gender differentiation
becomes discernable throughout books by men in some ways (ex. those books
frequently configuring women with lips and rarely so with men), but then that
differentiation becomes apparent in books by women for a different set of reasons
(ex. these books often mention men as having beards and not so with women). It’s
perhaps possible then training models on both groups of authors diluted some of
those gender divisions, resulting in slightly lower accuracies. So, if the patterns in

21

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

Figure 5 prove consistent, it would raise several questions about the kinds of novels
that men and write and their different relationships to gendered body language.38
Because we have seen that embodied gender differentiation is more apparent in
books by men than in those by women, there’s a very tempting claim to advance.
Male authors have a stronger tendency to institute a heteronormative representation
of characters’ bodies. If we want to fully map out that observation, we will need a
better understanding of the variabilities reflected in Figure 5. For example, when it
comes to books by men, we will need to explain why the gendered differences
between fictive men’s and women’s bodies become increasingly apparent after
1900. While the gendered differences between fictive men and women become
increasingly sharp during the twentieth century, this is less the case during the midto-late nineteenth century. The gendering of the body just wasn’t that much more
apparent in books written by men than in those by women. Advancing this claim,
will require a better understanding of that gradual transition. On the other hand, when
it comes to books by women, the task of interpretation is a bit more difficult. When
the task of gender inference was becoming easier in books by men, they were
erratically declining for books by women (occasionally falling below 75%
accuracy). It isn’t immediately clear why the division between fictive men’s and
women’s bodies became more diffuse. One might point to the way that pattern aligns
with the rise in second-wave feminism during the mid-twentieth century, and it’s
focus on women’s bodies and sexuality. But more research is needed to understand
this important part of the story.

Transformations of the Gendered Body
Setting aside broad cultural hypotheses for now, how can we analyze the historical
transformation of individual bodily characteristics? The previous analyses reflect the
fluctuating degree to which the body was gendered over time. But we know that
notions of embodied gender shift in qualitative ways as well. In order to explore
those transformations, we need a way of visualizing the gendering of particular
features across the timeline.

22

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

There are many ways to do this. Jockers and Kirilloff have shown that a good first
step can be to unpack the classification models, noting which factors lead to the most
correct gender inferences. In effect, we’re looking at which physical descriptions,
on average, were most exclusively attributed to one gender category. Since this essay
produced fifteen different models of physical description for each decade, we can
see bodily descriptors that all fifteen models agreed had a gendered distribution.
While this selection process is a more conservative, we can be surer that the resulting
physical features tend to be exclusively attributed to either female or male
characters. When we perform that analysis, we get too many physical characteristics
to list here. Because gender inferences were very accurate in certain decades, it
makes some intuitive sense that several bodily descriptors are exclusively deployed
along gendered lines. Let’s start by taking the terms that the model considered to
have the strongest gender associations (calculated, in part, by how often they lead to
correct gender inferences). We can then compare them with a sample from the 2000s.

Sample of Ten Words Attributed More Exclusively to Either Fictive Men or Women
1850

2000

Attributed to Men

Attributed to Women

Attributed to Men

Attributed to Women

Arm

Bare

Chest

Breast

Belly

Was Clasped

Big

Beautiful

Breast

Bosom

Huge

Bright

Was Bend

Was Kissed

23

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

1850

2000

Attributed to Men

Attributed to Women

Red

Blue

Right

Was Taken

Hand

Full

Was Rubbed

Little

Attributed to Men

Attributed to Women

Table 3. Bodily terms that my model considered to be most reliably indicative of either men or women characters.

This isn’t a complete list, but that’s fine for our purposes. We just want to see which
features helped the model infer characters’ genders the most, because those features
functioned as the most reliable signs of gender for the classifier. In the 1850s model,
there are a wide range of features that were consistently associated with either men
or women. In the 2000s model, there are far fewer, indicating words like “chest” for
men and “breast” for women are some of the only features that the model was
confident about. What’s fascinating about that result is that “breast” was more
exclusively attributed to men in the 1850s, even though that characteristic tends to
be associated more exclusively often with women by the 2000s. From a twenty-first
century perspective, this result might seem strange, because intuition might lead us
to assume that the word “breast” has always been central to configuring a biological
female identity.
As one can imagine, this kind of analysis provides a lot of avenues for future
research: the gendering of size, the gendering of bodily gestures, etc. But if we want
to investigate the gendering of a feature over time, let’s say the translocation of the
word breast from fictive men to women, we’ll need a different kind of method.
Drawing from Underwood et. al., we can calculate the difference of a word’s usage
for men and women across the timeline. Let’s say we randomly select 10,000
physical descriptors attributed to women, then we randomly select 10,000
24

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

descriptors attributed to men, and then subtract how often each word is used for
women by how often it is used for men. We can then ask, “how much more (or less)
often was this used for women than men?” Essentially, we’re subtracting the
normalized frequency of a term’s use between men and women, scaling that
difference to reflect how often we might expect to see that term in 10,000 physical
characteristics describing either men or women. The more positive the value, the
more often a word was used for women. The more negative, the more it was used
for men. In this case, if we take the normalized frequency of “breast,” “chest,” and
“bosom” being attributed to women, and subtract the normalized frequency of those
words being used from men, will the differences reflect the transfer of the word
breast from fictional men to women?

Figure 6. Word use difference between fictional men and women, scaling to see how that difference plays out in
10000 words. Shown for the words bosom, breast, and chest.

While the word “breast” was more frequently attributed to men before the twentieth
century, that physical characteristic becomes more exclusively attributed to women
as we move towards the twenty-first century. Around the same time, the word
“chest” gradually shifts from being attributed to characters of both genders to being
more closely attributed to men. “Bosom,” on the other hand, is steadily governed
25

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

more often by feminine characters, though not as exclusively as the word breast by
the 2000s. If those patterns prove durable, they would add weight to Butler’s famous
argument that “the gathering of attributes under the category of sex [is]
suspect...That penis, vagina, breasts, and so forth, are named sexual parts is both a
restriction…and a fragmentation of the body”.39 For Butler, the difference between
biological sex and constructed gender is untenable. Even bodily features that seem
like a stable signifier of male or female identity, such as breasts and chests, are not
inherently objective signs of natural difference. Rather, as Figure 6 may suggest, the
association of these terms with a specific gender is discursively constructed over
time.
Because it’s not intuitively clear what that broad historical transition might mean at
the level of text, it’s worth working through a few concrete examples. Let’s take
novels from each end of the timeline that most frequently mention a man’s breast
and compare them. Starting at the 1850s-1860s, it’s not difficult to find various
scenes where descriptions of men’s breasts are used to dramatize sensational fiction.
On an anecdotal register, several of those novels turn out to be penny dreadful
adventure books, such as Edward Viles’s immensely popular Black Bess; or, The
Knight of the Road and John Mills’s Too Fast to Last. In Black Bess, mentions of
men’s breasts often appear in theatrical scenes involving swashbuckling combat –
the kind where an unfortunate character announces his demise by melodramatically
placing “his hands upon his breast and [falling] backwards.”40 In these scenes, the
mentions of men’s breasts are quite literal. There are other scenes in Black Bess,
however, where that body part dramatically focalizes the narrative around more
internal conflicts. In one scene, for instance, a stable boy agrees to shelter rogue
highwaymen but then debates betraying their presence to the authorities while they
sleep. The reader is then told that “a severe struggle took place in his breast. By
giving up the highwaymen to justice, he would be merely doing his duty to society.”
Where readers might expect such ethical conflicts to take place in the “head,”
“mind”, or “heart” of a character, these novels locate such conflicts in the breasts of
men.
Anecdotally, when we fast forward to the late 90s and early 2000s, the books that
most often mention men’s chests, as well as women’s breasts, are sometimes fantasy
novels with a similar adventure element. In fantasy adventures such as Terry
26

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Goodkind’s The Stone of Truth or Stephen R. Donaldson’s The Wounded Land, we
see some similarly literal mentions of these body parts. Adventuring men get into
medieval skirmishes and come out with “a handful of arrows that stuck out of his
chest.”41 When it comes to describing these sorts of melees, the use of the word
breast versus chest is arguably quite interchangeable. What’s very different,
however, is that the use of the word chest to describe men sets up scenes where
women can then contrastingly be described as having breasts. At the very least, in
Goodkind’s novel, there’s a much more noticeable heteronormative arrangement
where women are depicted as intimately “rubbing a hand on his chest” or scenes of
a man “complimenting a woman on her breasts.”42 RUnlike Viles’s nineteenth
century penny dreadful, the more physically intimate representations of men and
women tend to produce these sorts of gendered contrasts. That’s not to say that this
heteronormative arrangement is the only reason why the word chest gets
increasingly aligned with men. Just that Goodkind’s novel presents some examples
of how that alignment of men with chests and women with breasts could have
happened.
From these close readings and the evidence in Figure 6, we may be able to conclude
that the bodies of men and women are now quite different from what they were in
the 1850s. The gender-body associations built up in the nineteenth century have
collapsed (or, in some cases, have become re-associated with a different gender). To
advance that thesis, we could find other bodily characteristics that gradually move
from one gender to another across the timeline.

27

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

Figure 7. Word use difference between fictional men and women, scaling to see how that difference plays out in 10000 words.
Shown for the words: hip, skin, and was bitten.

These particular gender instabilities might turn out to be more important to literary
scholars, as they more immediately lead to questions that could use literary and
social forms of evidence. At the very least, they point to a kind of instability not
covered in my classification experiment (Figure 4). We saw that gender gradually
diminishes as an organizing force from the 1960s forward, but that’s not the only
form instability can take. Instead, body language that was once used to configure
one gender identity can be redeployed to construct different gender identities
altogether.

Conclusion
This essay has argued that gender divisions became increasingly central to a growing
aspect of character. From the mid-nineteenth century, to the early twenty-first,
bodily features continually become a growing aspect of all characters. This
28

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

expansion, however, has had a disproportionate effect on the characterization of
women. In fact, the proportion of words used to describe characters’ bodies has
consistently been greater for women than men, suggesting that the body has been
more central to developing female characters. At the same time, as the body
continued to become an increasingly conventional mode of representing people,
bodily characteristics were increasingly becoming distributed along a masculinefeminine axis. This continues to be the case until around the 1960s, when inferring
gender from characters’ physical features starts to become more and more difficult.
Taken altogether, there’s a lot of evidence to support the long historical relationship
between representations of the body and binary gender. And there’s also evidence
suggesting that those embodied binaries have played a more prominent role in books
by men until the past four decades.
Each of these conclusions enticingly maps onto existing theories about the broader
culture, but there are several methodological questions to explore along the way. An
important question, for instance, is how best to negotiate the quantitative evidence
presented in this essay with that of previous research. If we consider the different
results between this essay and Underwood et al., for instance, one could reasonably
conclude that certain forms of gender differentiation diminished while others were
on the rise. I want to take that statement just one step further, suggesting that we may
want to be more sensitive to the varying weight of those different forms of
characterization. If we’re going to argue that the strength of gender stereotypes
concretizes in some modes of characterization and diminishes in others, then we’re
really going to want some way to compare the relative significance of those different
modes. Given that bodily description, for instance, is nearly one-fifth of the words
used in producing characters, it doesn’t seem completely unfair to suggest that
certain forms of gender differentiation were more visible than others. This isn’t at
all to say that some configurations of gender are more significant than others. Rather,
there should be a conversation about whether certain forms of differentiation had a
disproportionate effect on the gendering of characters.
I also don’t want to make it seem like I have provided a complete solution. I’ve
merely sketched out one way of analyzing the varied relationship between character
and gender. It’s entirely possible, and very likely, that dividing some of the words
describing characters and labelling it “anatomical description” proves to be an

29

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

incomplete approach. One can imagine, for instance, that if I had included nonanatomical forms of embodiment, such as “fear,” “nervousness,” etc., the results
could look very different. Moreover, as I discussed earlier, there’s also the open
question of how to relate the results of two models conditioned on different feature
sets. My model of body language contains a subset of the features used in
Underwood et al.’s experiments, but there’s an important open question about what
the discrepancies mean for each other. I suggest that my model disaggregates
Underwood et al.’s model, unfolding patterns of literary change that would
otherwise be suppressed. However, I ultimately conclude that we’ll want both
models, as they shed light on different scales of characterization. These methods are
still relatively new to the study of literature, so there’s still room to discuss how best
to contextualize the different results of predictive models. At the very least, this
essay hopes to instigate conversation on that methodological front. And, if we expect
that more models of character and gender will be developed in the coming years,
that conversation will have to happen eventually.
As we sort out the different approaches, there are still some theoretical debates about
gender that will need to be addressed. To what degree does the evidence lend itself
to Mulveyian theories of sexual objectification? We have seen that fictive women,
at least since the 1850s, have been comprised of more bodily description than men,
meaning that we have some evidence that women have historically been more
associated with the body. But we also saw that a binary conception of embodied
gender was much more prominent in novels written by men? What’s the gap between
those patterns and a more complete mapping of objectifying body language? If
cultural analytics is invested in engaging with that longer history of gender and
sexual criticism, that question seems like a good place to start.
Taken altogether, there’s a lot more work to be done in order to understand embodied
conceptions of gender. My hope is that this essay sheds light on the longer literary
history about the body and gender. Future work can hopefully move past a binary
model of gender, analyzing how more diverse forms of gender identity have been
embodied throughout history. In this case, those binaries were necessary for
rendering the literary effect of particular history of body language. More
specifically, treating characters as either men or women elucidates the relationship
between binary gender and anatomical language, analyzing the imbrication of
30

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

physiological words and conventional representations of gender. Moving forward,
however, it will be exciting to remove the binary entirely and study more
androgynous or gender fluid modes of embodiment.

Appendix: Corpus Metadata
Corpus

Year Range

Stanford Literary Lab

1750 - 1900

Chicago Text Lab

1880 – 2000

Year Range

Percent of Total Dataset

1850 – 1900

29 %

1900 – 2000

71 %

Year Range

Percent of Novels
by Women

Percent of Novels by
Men

1850 – 1900

43 %

57 %

1900 – 2000

38 %

62 %

Decade

Percent of Novels
by Women

Percent of Novels by
Men

1850

42%

58%

1860

42%

58%

1870

40%

60%

1880

50%

50%

1890

40%

60%

31

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

Decade

Percent of Novels
by Women

Percent of Novels by
Men

1900

30%

70%

1910

30%

70%

1920

30%

70%

1930

34%

66%

1940

40%

60%

1950

24%

76%

1960

23%

77%

1970

28%

72%

1980

38%

62%

1990

49%

51%

2000

51%

49%

Notes
1

Matthew Jockers and Gabi Kiriloff, “Understanding Gender and Character Agency in the 19th Century Novel,”
Cultural Analytics (December, 2016).
2

See also Andrew Piper, Enumerations: Data and Literary Study (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018),
118-146. Piper’s fifth chapter, “Characterization,” explores the relationship between gender and different parts of
speech.
3

Using numbers to study the representation of gender in fiction also extends far beyond these two examples. See
also, Eve Kraicer and Andrew Piper, “Social Characters: The Hierarchy of Gender in Contemporary EnglishLanguage Fiction.” Cultural Analytics (January 2019). Or, Sean G. Weidman and James O’Sullivan, “The Limits of
Distinctive Words: Re-Evaluating Literature’s Gender Marker Debate,” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 33,
no. 2 (2017): 374–90.
4

Ted Underwood, David Bamman, and Sabrina Lee, “The Transformation of Gender in English-Language Fiction,”
Cultural Analytics (February, 2018). For further discussion of that article, see also: Ted Underwood, Distant
Horizons: Digital Evidence and Literary Change (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2019), 111-142. The
chapter “Metamorphoses of Gender” draws from their article in Cultural Analytics, discussing some of the open
questions that come out of their study.

32

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

5

Laura Mulvey, “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema,” Screen 16, no. 3 (1975): 6–18.

6

Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (New York: Routledge, 1990).

7

Several parts of this project were only doable with the help of others. Funding for this project came through a
research assistantship funded by NovelTM, directed by Andrew Piper. The Chicago Novel Corpus was collected by
Hoyt Long and Richard Jean So and metadata was provided by Teddy Roland. The Stanford Novel Corpus was
provided by Matthew Jockers and required the contributions of the Stanford Literary Lab.
8

For two recently analogous projects that have reached adjacent arguments, see also: (Piper, 105-115). Piper’s
fourth chapter, “Fictionality,” compares a corpus of fiction and nonfiction texts, providing evidence that words
about sensory experience and the observed human body are characteristic of fiction. See also (Underwood, 24-26).
Underwood’s first chapter, “Do We Understand the Outlines of Literary History?” uses logistic regression to model
the relationship between biography and fiction. Then, he sees which features correlate with which genre. Similar to
Piper’s findings, body parts turn out to be an important feature of fiction.
9

In “The Transformation of Gender in English-Language Fiction,” Underwood et. al. show how words like “hair”
have become more associated with women and “chest” with men.
10

David Bamman, Ted Underwood, and Noah Smith, "A Bayesian Mixed Effects Model of Literary
Character," ACL 2014.
11

This preprocessing was primarily performed using spaCy libraries. https://spacy.io/.

12

For a more thorough explanation of dependency parsing, see Stanford’s page on their Neural Network
Dependency Parser. https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/nndep.html.
13

The list of body language to extract was created by scraping several different ESL lists and scraping synonyms
for those parts. The full list of body words is as follows: [body, physique, build, figure, anatomy, shape, flesh, skin,
frame, skeleton, appearance, hair, hairs, head, skull, forehead, brow, temple, face, countenance, physiognomy, eye,
eyes, pupil, pupils, lash, lashes, eyelash, eyelashes, eyebrow, eyebrows, iris, irises, nose, nostril, nostrils, lip, lips,
mouth, tooth, teeth, tongue, ear, ears, eardrum, eardrums, earlobe, earlobes, neck, cheek, cheeks, dimple, dimples,
cheekbone, cheekbones, chin, jaw, jawbone, jowl, jowls, dimple, dimples, cheekbone, cheekbones, moustache,
beard, mole, freckle, freckles, shoulder, shoulders, armpit, armpits, chest, bust, torso, breast, breasts, bosom, nipple,
nipples, arm, arms, limb, limbs, elbow, elbows, forearm, forearms, wrist, wrists, bicep, biceps, triceps, stomach,
abdomen, belly, waist, hip, hips, thigh, thighs, crotch, groin, butt, buttocks, leg, legs, knee, knees, calf, calves, ankle,
ankles, heel, heels, foot, feet, toe, toes, toenail, toenails, sole, soles, hand, hands, fist, fists, finger, fingers, digit,
digits, thumb, thumbs, fingernail, fingernails, forefinger, palm, palms, knuckle, knuckles, wrist, wrists, brain, brains,
nerve, nerves, join, joints, tendon, tendons, ligament, ligaments, lung, lungs, diaphragm, pharynx, larynx, trachea,
bronchi, kidney, kidneys, bladder, uterus, esophagus, gut, liver, intestine, intestines, bowel, bowels, ovaries, vagina,
prostate, penis, testicle, testicles, heart, artery, arteries, vein, veins, capillary, capillaries, bone, bones, marrow, lock,
locks, curls, sight, eyesight, vision, perception, view, hearing, taste, appetite, smell, touch.] One major oversight of
this approach is that it does not include slang terms for these bodily terms. Intuitively, we can imagine literature that
relies heavily on such language (e.g. novels with a significant regional dimension), and this word-list could
systematically diminish anatomical description in those novels.
14

Stephen King, Salem's Lot (New York: Anchor Books, 2013).

15

For a critique of these labels, see Miriam Posner, “What’s Next: The Radical, Unrealized Potential of Digital
Humanities.” in Debates in the Digital Humanities, ed. Matthew K. Gold and Lauren F. Klein (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2016).
16

Inferring gender from names was done using Lincoln Mullen, Gender: Predict Gender from Names Using
Historical Data. (version R package version 0.5.2), 2018. https://github.com/ropensci/gender.

33

FLESHING OUT MODELS OF GENDER IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE NOVELS (1850 – 2000)

17

A complete spreadsheet of the metadata is provided in the data repository.

18

The appendix provides information on the gender and historical distribution of my dataset. One aspect of the
1900-2000 portion of my corpus (from Chicago Text Lab), that is not apparent in the metadata, is that it is somewhat
dependent upon popular genre forms in certain periods (Romance, Detective, Social, Fantasy, Sci – Fi, etc.). The
1850-2000 portion of the corpus comes from multiple sources (Project Gutenberg, Chadwyck-Healey, etc.) and is
less informed by notions of genre.
19

In fact, according to their study, there is a steady decline from about 1800 to 1970. At which point, around only
30% of characterizing words are used to describe women.
20

Ryan Heuser and Long Le-Khac, "A Quantitative Literary History of 2,958 Nineteenth-Century British Novels:
The Semantic Cohort Method." Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlet Series, 2012.
21

Herbert L. Sussman, Victorian Masculinities: Manhood and Masculine Poetics in Early Victorian Literature and
Art (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008).
22

If there were, hypothetically, 1000 words describing women and 200 of them were describing their physical
features, we’d say that 20 percent of the words characterizing women had something to do with their physicality.
23

There are many ways of interpreting Pearson’s correlation coefficient. In psychological research, there are some
conventions to interpret r’s effect size. Small: 0.10, Moderate: 0.30, Large: 0.50. Jacob Cohen, “A Power Primer,”
Psychological Bulletin 112, no. I (1992): 155-59.
24

(Piper, 128-138).

25

Bill Burgwinkle, “Medieval Somatics,” In The Cambridge Companion to the Body in Literature, ed. David A.
Hillman and Ulrika Maude (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015), 10–23.
26

Fredric Jameson, The Antinomies of Realism (London: New York: Verso, 2015), 27-44.

27

Catherine Gallagher, The Body Economic: Life, Death, and Sensation in Political Economy and the Victorian
Novel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2006).
28

Lucy Hartley, Physiognomy and the Meaning of Expression in Nineteenth-Century Culture (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2005).
29

(Butler, 12).

30

Binary classification was used in Jockers’s and Kirilloff’s study of gendered action. They modelled the extent that
character-verbs were attributed along gendered lines. Similarly, Underwood et al. use this method to model all
words attributed to fictive men and women.
31

The classification algorithm was nearest shrunken centroid. For an application and thorough discussion of that
classifier, see Robert Tibshirani, Trevor Hasti, Balasubramanian Narasimhan, and Gilbert Chu, “Class Prediction by
Nearest Shrunken Centroid, with Application to DNA Microarrays,” Statistical Science 18, no. 1 (February 2003):
104-17.
32

In Underwood et al., inferring gender peaks at around 76% and steadily dips to sub-65% accuracy. See Figure 7.

33

For a longer discussion of unintended machine learning biases, including aggregation bias, see: Harini Suresh
and John V. Guttag, “A Framework for Understanding Unintended Consequences of Machine Learning,” arXiv (Jan,
2019). arXiv:1901.10002v1.
34

Kate Flint, The Victorians and the Visual Imagination (Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 2000), 26.

34

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

35

Peter J. Capuano, Changing Hands: Industry, Evolution and the Reconfiguration of the Victorian Body (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2015), 100.
36

More specifically, Capuano demonstrates how those bodily conflicts often surface in William Thackeray’s Vanity
Fair where Becky “‘Sharp put out her right fore-finger – And gave him a little nod, so cool and so killing, that
Rawdon Crawley…could hardly contain his laughter.’”
37

As with the previous models, we randomly sampled an even number of characters from each decade (225 men and
225 women). I continued to use the nearest shrunken centroid classifier. Future replications will want to test other
classifiers, such as logistic regression.
38

Underwood will present evidence to aligns with this possibility. Ted Underwood, “A Measured Perspective,”
PMLA (forthcoming). Further research will then be needed to see whether this improvement is more attributable to
the gendered perspectives of authors themselves or the types of gendered fiction they produce.
39

(Butler, 146).

40

Terry Goodkind. Stone of Tears. (New York: Tor Books, 1995).

41

Stephen R. Donaldson. The Wounded Land. (New York: Del Rey, 2012).

42

(Donaldson, 82). (Donaldson, 464).

35

