Antoniak, Maria, et al. “The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social
Readership.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116919.

ARTICLE

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social
Readership
Maria Antoniak1, David Mimno2, Rosamond Thalken2, Melanie Walsh3, Matthew Wilkens2, Gregory Yauney2

a

1 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, 2 Cornell University, 3 University of Washington

Keywords: Shakespeare and Company, readers and reading, literature, social media, network analysis, Goodreads, modernism
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116919

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 2, 2024

The growth of social reading platforms such as Goodreads and LibraryThing
enables us to analyze reading activity at very large scale and in remarkable detail.
But twenty-first century systems give us a perspective only on contemporary
readers. Meanwhile, the digitization of the lending library records of
Shakespeare and Company provides a window into the reading activity of an
earlier, smaller community in interwar Paris. In this article, we explore the
extent to which we can make comparisons between the Shakespeare and
Company and Goodreads communities. By quantifying similarities and
differences, we can identify patterns in how works have risen or fallen in
popularity across these datasets. We can also measure differences in how works
are received by measuring similarities and differences in co-reading patterns.
Finally, by examining the complete networks of co-readership, we can observe
changes in the overall structures of literary reception.

Introduction
The growth of social reading platforms such as Goodreads and LibraryThing
enables us to analyze reading activity at very large scale and in remarkable
detail. But twenty-first century systems give us a perspective only on
contemporary readers. Meanwhile, the digitization of the lending library
records of Shakespeare and Company (SC) provides a window into the
reading activity of an earlier, smaller community in interwar Paris. In this
article, we explore the extent to which we can make comparisons between the
SC and Goodreads communities. By quantifying similarities and differences,
we are able to identify patterns in how works have risen or fallen in popularity
across these datasets. We can also measure differences in how works are
received by measuring similarities and differences in co-reading patterns.
Finally, by examining the complete networks of co-readership, we can observe
changes in the overall structures of literary reception.
Both of our data sources consist of interactions between readers and books,
but there are substantial differences in context, content, and scale. SC was
an English-language bookshop and lending library, run by Sylvia Beach in

a All authors contributed equally, and the authors are listed in alphabetical order.

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Paris between 1919 and 1941. Its patrons included famous writers such as
Gertrude Stein and Ernest Hemingway, as well as lesser-known writers, artists,
and academics. In contrast, Goodreads is a large social website that allows
its members to write reviews, to like and comment on others’ reviews, rate
books, rank books on lists, tag books, participate in reading groups, and
take other reading-related actions. Goodreads launched in 2007 and currently
has over ninety million members, while the SC dataset contains a total of
6,018 works and 5,601 patrons. Although the SC dataset contains borrowing
records for only eleven percent of the library’s members, and its records are
more comprehensive for the 1930s than for other decades, it nevertheless
provides a large amount of information about the reading habits of an
important literary community (see Kotin and Koeser).
SC and Goodreads differ in other ways, as well. They reflect reading practices
separated by nearly a century of historical time. SC catered to a specific
community in Paris, while Goodreads users are spread throughout the world.
SC readers were mostly bohemian and middle- and upper-class writers,
scholars, artists, and critics; Goodreads is used by millions across a
presumptively wider (if not necessarily fully representative) socioeconomic
range. SC records track the borrowing and purchasing of physical books,
while there is no guarantee that a Goodreads reviewer has seen, read, or
opened a given book.
Despite the many factors that distinguish the two datasets, there are also
points of commonality that lead us to expect that a comparison would be
enlightening. SC was not just any local lending library; it was the focal point
of a community of readers that was influential in shaping our contemporary
view of the modernist period. Many authors whose works are now considered
modernist classics were either members of the community or were personally
known by its members. Measuring the specific ways in which SC reading
patterns are, and are not, reflected in modern reading patterns may provide
insight into the formation of—or at least one version of—the contemporary
Anglophone literary canon.
In this article, we pursue three main strategies for computational comparison
of SC and Goodreads. First, we begin by comparing the basic properties
of individual works across the two datasets. Of the books that appear in
both datasets, we find that, even after a century has passed, almost twenty
percent of the hundred most borrowed works in SC are still among the
hundred most reviewed books from this set on Goodreads. These enduringly
popular books were mostly contemporary to the SC collection; the older
books that were favorites of SC readers are less likely to be read and reviewed
today. Relatedly, we find that the books that rose the most in popularity
from SC to Goodreads include titles by nineteenth-century authors whose
work was out of fashion among SC readers (e.g., Jane Austen), while books
that fell in popularity include then-contemporary authors (e.g., Dorothy

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Richardson) who are today primarily the province of scholars. These changes
demonstrate the simultaneous expansion and winnowing over time to reach
one modern community understanding of “the classics” (see Walsh and
Antoniak; Guillory). Our results also suggest that readers today treat many
of the modernist-era texts that were first consumed by SC members as an era
cohort (that is, as a historically distinct and coherent set) that has remained
broadly legible for nearly a century.
Second, we consider the two communities from a network perspective,
comparing works on the basis of their connection to other works. We find
that many of the books that retain popularity from SC to Goodreads also
maintain the same patterns of co-readership between the two groups. This
fact again suggests that, at least in the case of books read by SC and
Goodreads members, the literary contexts of reception can be stable across
widely diverse environments.
Third, we consider the structure of the two networks as a whole. We find
that, rather than showing which books were most central, or core, to each
community, network analysis magnifies the reading habits of two prolific SC
readers (and friends) in a way that may be useful for newly directed historical
research.

Data Collection and Processing
We match 4,460 (74.1 percent) of the 6,018 SC books to records in
Goodreads. We use the Goodreads API to search for the book IDs
corresponding to each title and author. We then manually check each match
and update the book IDs when no match is found or when the matched
book is incorrect. Many books have multiple versions in Goodreads, and
we prioritize the most specific (e.g., individual volumes rather than collected
works) and popular (by numbers of ratings and reviews). From the ranked
set of results for each book, we select the book with the highest number of
ratings as our final match.
After matching each SC book with its Goodreads book ID, we scrape the
Goodreads page for that book. This data includes the ISBN, the number
of pages, number of reviews, number of ratings, average and distribution
of the ratings, original publication year, and the shelves, genres, and lists
to which the book is assigned by Goodreads members. After scraping, we
have a set of 4,454 books by 1,726 authors, with 3,940 of those books
receiving at least one rating and 3,223 books receiving at least one review. We
release this connected metadata at https://github.com/gyauney/shakespeareand-company-social-readership.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Comparing Popularity in SC and Goodreads
To measure the relative popularity of books in the two datasets, we count
the number of times the book was borrowed from SC and the number of
text reviews the book received on Goodreads. As shown in the plots below,
these popularity metrics have a much wider range for Goodreads (maximum
reviews: 77,817) than for SC (maximum borrows: fifty-six). Since many SC
books have the same (small) number of borrows, fine-grained comparisons of
popularity rank are possible only in the Goodreads data. In all the following
results, we show only books that appeared in both datasets (according to the
matching process described above) (fig. 1).

Figure 1. Kernel density estimate (KDE) plots of the popularity distributions for SC and Goodreads.

We begin by listing the most popular books in each of the datasets (table 1, 2).
James Joyce, Dorothy Richardson, and Katherine Mansfield dominate the SC
most popular books—all authors contemporary to SC—while Jane Austen,
Charlotte Brontë, and F. Scott Fitzgerald (an SC contemporary and, briefly,
member, but not a particular community insider), dominate the Goodreads
most popular books. The lists of most popular authors in the two datasets
reflect the same pattern (table 3). One difference is that D. H. Lawrence is the
most borrowed author in SC, despite having only one top-ten most-borrowed
book.
In order to reduce bias toward the most popular works, we next convert our
popularity metrics to ranks, where the zero-ranked book or author is the
most popular. We scale these ranks to a [0, 1] range and compare the ranks
in SC and Goodreads in the following plots. According to these ranks, the
popularity of both the books and authors is correlated across the SC and
Goodreads datasets; if a book or author is popular on Goodreads, it is also
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Table 1. The books borrowed most often in the SC dataset. (Only books also included in the Goodreads dataset are shown here).
Title

Author

Borrowed

A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man

James Joyce

56

Dubliners

James Joyce

47

Pointed Roofs

Dorothy Richardson

45

The Garden Party and Other Stories

Katherine Mansfield

37

Mr Norris Changes Trains

Christopher Isherwood

36

A Passage to India

E. M. Forster

35

Mrs Dalloway

Virginia Woolf

34

Women in Love

D. H. Lawrence

33

Point Counter Point

Aldous Huxley

33

The Good Earth

Pearl S. Buck

33

Table 2. The books reviewed most often in the Goodreads dataset. (Only books also included in the SC dataset are shown here.)
Title

Author

Text Reviews

Pride and Prejudice

Jane Austen

77,817

The Great Gatsby

F. Scott Fitzgerald

75,296

Jane Eyre

Charlotte Brontë

47,139

Wuthering Heights

Emily Brontë

42,403

And Then There Were None

Agatha Christie

40,393

Of Mice and Men

John Steinbeck

37,837

The Picture of Dorian Gray

Oscar Wilde

37,248

Little Women

Louisa May Alcott

34,878

Brave New World

Aldous Huxley

34,579

Dracula

Bram Stoker

29,583

Table 3. The most popular authors in the SC and Goodreads datasets.
Top SC Authors

Total Borrows (Across Titles)

Top Goodreads Authors

Total Text Reviews (Across Titles)

D. H. Lawrence

300

Jane Austen

168,543

Virginia Woolf

249

Agatha Christie

125,986

Aldous Huxley

235

F. Scott Fitzgerald

84,789

Dorothy Richardson

198

Charles Dickens

69,609

W. Somerset Maugham

187

John Steinbeck

60,344

James Joyce

182

William Shakespeare

59,935

Ernest Hemingway

182

Oscar Wilde

53,992

John Galsworthy

180

Charlotte Brontë

53,796

Henry James

169

Fyodor Dostoyevsky

49,215

William Faulkner

163

Emily Brontë

42,503

likely to be popular in SC. But there are many outliers, indicating cases where
a book or author is much more popular in one dataset than in the other.
These outliers represent a rise or fall in popularity rank. Of the shared books,
eighteen of the hundred most borrowed SC books are among the hundred
most reviewed Goodreads books (of the books included in our datasets) (fig.
2).
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Table 4. The books that rose the most in popularity rank from SC to Goodreads.
Change in Rank

Title

Author

+0.96

Little Women

Louisa May Alcott

+0.96

Dracula

Bram Stoker

+0.96

The Wonderful Wizard of Oz

L. Frank Baum

+0.95

Anna Karenina

Leo Tolstoy

+0.92

Macbeth

William Shakespeare

+0.92

The Trial

Franz Kafka

+0.92

Madame Bovary

Gustave Flaubert

+0.91

All Quiet on the Western Front

Erich Maria Remarque

+0.91

Uncle Tom’s Cabin

Harriet Beecher Stowe

+0.91

Mansfield Park

Jane Austen

Figure 2. A comparison of author popularity in Goodreads and SC.
Each point represents an author, while the x-axis represents the ranked popularity in SC (by number of borrows) and the y-axis
represents the ranked popularity in Goodreads (by number of text reviews). We sum the popularity metrics across books for each
author. Popularity in Goodreads and SC is correlated (Pearson r=0.51, p<0.05), but there are many outliers representing authors that
are much more popular in one dataset than the other. Leo Tolstoy and Louisa May Alcott, for example, are much more popular in
Goodreads than they were among SC patrons. An interactive plot can be found at: https://viz.shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/2024/
afterlives/.

Rose the Most in Rank (from SC to Goodreads)
To tease apart which books were popular in Goodreads in comparison
with SC, we calculate each book’s change in rank: its Goodreads rank
subtracted from its SC rank. Of the books that rose the most in popularity
on Goodreads, many are older books—published before SC opened (table 4).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Table 5. The books that fell the most in popularity rank from SC to Goodreads.
Change in
Rank

Title

Author

-0.59

Bliss & Other Stories

Katherine
Mansfield

-0.60

The Tunnel: Pilgrimage, Volume 4

Dorothy
Richardson

-0.63

Pointed Roofs, Backwater, Honeycomb

Dorothy
Richardson

-0.63

Pilgrimage: Backwater

Dorothy
Richardson

-0.63

The Fountain

Charles Morgan

-0.63

Experiment in Autobiography: Discoveries & Conclusions of a Very Ordinary Brain
(Since 1866)

H. G. Wells

-0.64

Studies in the Psychology of Sex

Havelock Ellis

-0.70

South Wind

Norman Douglas

-0.74

Sparkenbroke

Charles Morgan

-0.85

Pointed Roofs

Dorothy
Richardson

Fell the Most in Rank (from SC to Goodreads)
Of the books that fell most in rank, all were contemporary to the active
years of SC (table 5). While many of these authors are still well known in
academic or literary contexts (e.g., Katherine Mansfield), they are not popular
with the majority of readers on Goodreads. For example, even in the 1930s,
the modernist and experimental author Dorothy Richardson did not enjoy
mainstream popularity, but her books were borrowed fairly often by SC
patrons, who would have been reading her work alongside contemporaries
such as James Joyce and Virginia Woolf. Richardson was also in personal
contact with Sylvia Beach. But her work is today largely ignored within the
Goodreads community.

Lists: Change in Rank (from SC to Goodreads)
The previous section shows that there are substantial differences in
interactions for both works and authors between the two datasets. But
Goodreads also includes features that allow us to explore how readers perceive
these changes; these lists can indicate why certain titles rose or fell in
popularity. Goodreads lists are ranked sets of books, created by users and to
which any user may add any books. Users influence rankings on these lists by
voting individual books up or down. These lists are frequent sources of both
creative experimentation and the codification of community values.
Examining the lists that Goodreads users assign to the SC books, we find
strong evidence of the canonical status of many SC titles (table 6). The lists
to which SC books are most frequently assigned by Goodreads users are lists
of best books (e.g., Best Books Ever, Best Books of the 20th Century) and
lists of books everyone should read (e.g., Books That Everyone Should Read
At Least Once, Must Read Classics).
Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Table 6. The most popular lists to which Goodreads users assign books matched with SC.
List Name

Number of Books on List

Best Books Ever

465

Books That Everyone Should Read At Least Once

312

100 Books to Read in a Lifetime: Readers’ Picks

239

Best Books of the 20th Century

217

1001 Books You Must Read Before You Die

212

Must Read Classics

188

The Great Classics You Have Not Read Yet

170

The Guardian’s “1000 Novels Everyone Must Read”

168

Best Books of the 19th Century

164

Books that Blew Me Away and that I Still Think About

162

However, popular books are more likely to be added to lists, and so
unpopular books are missing from these categorizations. What about the
books that were popular among SC patrons but are not as popular on
Goodreads? Did SC members only read what they themselves would have
recognized as the “best books” and “books everyone should read,” or was their
reading more self-consciously avant-garde in historical context?
To answer these questions, we rank the lists by their change in mean rank
from SC to Goodreads. For each list, we represent the rank as the mean of
the ranks of the books that have been assigned to that list by at least five users.
We also require that at least ten books in our matched dataset be assigned to
each list; other lists are discarded. The results show which lists are associated
with books that rose or fell in popularity from SC to Goodreads (table 7). For
example, books assigned to lists associated with particular modernist authors
(e.g., James Joyce Reading List, Best of D. H. Lawrence) fell in popularity,
while books associated with what are today considered “classics” and with
children (e.g., Proliferation of the Classics, My Favorite Childhood books)
rose in popularity. Evidence from these lists indicates that books that rose in
popularity became part of the canon, while books that fell in popularity were
particular to the time and place of SC.

Shelves: Change in Rank (from SC to Goodreads)
Similar to lists are Goodreads shelves. Where lists are ranked, shelves function
more like free-text tags. Users employ shelves both for personal tracking
(e.g., to-read, my-favorites, read-in-2020) and to help build the community’s
mapping of books. In particular, shelves, unlike lists, often function as
genre labels (e.g., romance, historical fiction) on Goodreads, and so their
examination can reveal new perceptions and aspects of the books that rose or
fell in popularity (Antoniak et al.).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Table 7. Lists that rose and fell the most in rank from SC to Goodreads.
Change
in Rank

Lists That Rose Most in Rank

Change
in Rank

Lists That Fell Most in Rank

+0.84

100 Must Read Books

-0.05

Interwar British Vogue Recommends...

+0.84

Clean

-0.05

Best of Sinclair Lewis

+0.83

Books that reached 1000 editions (or more)

-0.05

James Joyce Reading List

+0.83

Half a million ratings to a million ratings

-0.06

REALLY Seriously Underrated Books
(100 to 500 Ratings)

+0.82

Amazing books that won’t make you blush, squirm, get
sick or have nightmares!

-0.07

Best of George Bernard Shaw

+0.81

Proliferation of Classics

-0.07

Modernism - An Alternate Canon

+0.81

Books Every Child Should Read

-0.08

Books banned in Ireland 1928-1929

+0.81

ONE DAY Best Summer Reads

-0.08

REALLY Underrated Books (Fewer than
1,000 Ratings)

+0.80

Best Free eBooks

-0.08

Best of D. H. Lawrence

+0.80

My Favorite Childhood books

-0.12

Underrated Bestsellers, Fewer Than
100 Ratings

Table 8. Shelves that rose and fell the most in rank from SC to Goodreads.
Change in Rank

Shelves That Rose Most in Rank

Change in Rank

Shelves That Fell Most in Rank (or Rose Least)

+0.75

read-in-school

+0.06

to-read

+0.73

school-reading

+0.04

bloomsbury

+0.72

william-shakespeare

+0.03

stream-of-consciousness

+0.71

thriller-mystery

+0.01

virago-modern-classics

+0.71

chick-lit

-0.03

lit-crit

+0.70

classics-read

-0.03

literary-criticism

+0.69

the-classics

-0.03

virago

+0.69

realistic-fiction

-0.05

d-h-lawrence

+0.69

childrens-lit

-0.05

criticism

+0.68

great-american-read

-0.08

joyce

As we did with lists, we can compare the shelves associated with books that
rose and fell the most in popularity. Again, we measure the rank for each shelf
as the mean of the ranks of the books assigned to that shelf by at least five
users and discard shelves that were assigned to fewer than ten books.
We find that shelves associated with books that rose the most in popularity
generally mention genres (thriller-mystery, chick-lit, childrens-lit), classics
(the-classics), or school (read-in-school), themes that prior work has
connected to popular discussions of canonization (Walsh and Antoniak)
(table 8). Shelves associated with books that fell in popularity tend to
mention specific authors (joyce, d-h-lawrence) or literary criticism (lit-crit,
literary-criticism). These results indicate that books that were read in school
or that fit genre classifications have remained popular, while books that do
not fit genre classifications have decreased in popularity.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Figure 3. Relative popularity of titles across SC and Goodreads for the 2225 titles published in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries with non-zero popularity in both datasets.
The y-value for each work is the proportion of total borrows in SC accounted for by the work, divided by the proportion of total
reviews in Goodreads accounted for by the work. Positive y-values mean that a book was more popular in SC. Negative y-values mean
a book is more popular in Goodreads. The most relatively popular books in SC are all from the twentieth century, while the most
relatively popular books in Goodreads are drawn more uniformly across the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. (For reference,
the top five SC titles by this metric are The Midas Touch [1938] by Margaret Kennedy, Ripeness is All [1935] by Eric Linklater, This is
Mr. Fortune [1938] by H. C. Bailey, The White Horses of Vienna [1937] by Kay Boyle, and The Washington Legation Murders [1935]
by F. Van Wyck Mason. The five Goodreads titles are Little Women [1880], Dracula [1897], Anna Karenina [1877], The Wonderful
Wizard of Oz [1900], and Madame Bovary [1857].) An interactive plot can be found at: https://viz.shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
2024/afterlives/.

In sum, our work on lists and shelves shows that even the sustained
prominence of authors and books that readers today associate with canonical
modernism does not match the status that those authors and books enjoyed
among SC members. While literary status can indeed be very durable, our
results suggest the early heights of popularity reached by a few authors within
the relatively small and distinctive SC group have not been sustained even
at the highest end of those evaluated by the larger, later, and more diverse
Goodreads community.

Chronological Comparison
In the previous section we noted that the most extreme changes in popularity
appeared to be correlated with year of publication. Here we provide a more
complete analysis of this relationship. We focus on books published between
1800 to 1940, for which we have the most reliable data. We find that books
that are more popular in Goodreads are spread roughly uniformly over the
time period, while the works more popular in SC are concentrated between
1910 and 1940 (fig. 3).
The top hundred works in Goodreads show much greater variation in
publication date than do the top hundred works in SC. Of the books that
appear in both SC and Goodreads, older titles were less popular in SC but
have a greater chance of still being read in Goodreads. Examples include

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Figure 4. Box plots of publication years for the most popular books in each dataset, truncated to remove lowest
outliers for Goodreads.

Wuthering Heights (1847), Moby-Dick (1851), and Tess of the D’Urbervilles
(1891). Earlier works that have most fallen in popularity include The Egoist
(1879), Esther Waters (1894), and The Plays of Bernard Shaw (1898) (fig. 4).

Comparing Contemporary Literature to US Bestsellers
Although we observe that the works that have fallen most in popularity
tend to be contemporary literature of the 1920s and 1930s, SC readers were
nevertheless reading many works that have remained popular. In order to
contextualize their reading patterns, we compare to one available source,
lists of the ten bestselling novels in the US reported by Publishers Weekly
(“Publishers Weekly Lists”). Focusing on works published from 1920–1929,
we compare the number of Goodreads ratings for the ninety-seven distinct
US bestsellers (three works were bestsellers in two consecutive years) to the
hundred most-borrowed SC works from that decade. The lists are measuring
different events (purchases by year vs. borrowing over two decades) and the
SC values include some works that are not novels and would not be counted,
but they provide a point of comparison. The US bestsellers are mostly
unfamiliar to modern readers, with a median of eighty-two ratings and a
mean of 7,050. Only six works have more than ten thousand ratings, with The
Age of Innocence (1920) and All Quiet on the Western Front (1929) skewing
the mean. In contrast, twenty-six of the top SC works have more than ten
thousand ratings, with a median of 1,030 and a mean of 64,151 (skewed by
The Great Gatsby [1925] at #84). Moreover, many of the books borrowed
most often by SC patrons remain popular today, with fifteen of the top
twenty-five SC works having more than 10,000 ratings by Goodreads users.
The lists of bestsellers and of most-borrowed SC titles are not similar, with
only eight works in common, of which five are by Sinclair Lewis. In short,
popularity among SC readers was a significantly better predictor of enduring
literary status than was commercial success at the time of publication.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Comparing Reading Patterns of Popular Books
Reception is defined not just by the frequency with which a book is read,
but also by whom and in what contexts it is read. In the previous section,
we measured the popularity of individual books, but we can also consider
patterns in reading behavior between books. There is a limit to what we
can learn from individual book popularity alone, while book co-reading
patterns provide a more detailed and nuanced picture. Additionally, such
patterns allow us to study co-reading across the entire community of readers
rather than limiting ourselves to which books were checked out by a single
reader. To compare co-reading patterns between the two periods, we further
restrict our dataset of matched titles to 1,685 books for which we have user
information from the UCSD Book Graph (Wan and McAuley). This dataset
contains more user information than is easily available from Goodreads. Each
dataset induces a network: in SC, two books are connected if they were
borrowed by the same member; in Goodreads, books are connected if they
were reviewed by the same user. We restrict our network analysis to the 1,511
books that are connected in both datasets.
We can compare the neighbors of each book in the two communities. If, for
a given book, these neighborhoods of books are similar in the two graphs,
we have evidence that the book was read in similar textual company by the
members of the two communities. If, in contrast, these neighbor graphs
are markedly different, we have evidence that a book has been received in
the company of different books. For example, a work might be seen as
representing a specific genre in SC, but modern readers might consider the
same work to be defined primarily by its prestige or “classic” status.
We operationalize similarity between reading patterns across the two graphs
by representing the neighbors of each book as a numeric vector. For each
book we define two vectors, the first representing reading patterns in SC and
the other representing reading patterns in Goodreads. A given book’s vector is
indexed by books, where each entry is proportional to the number of readers
who interacted with the given pair of books and the vectors are -normalized
into distributions. We use Jensen-Shannon divergence as a standard method
for comparing each book’s two vectors (Chang and DeDeo).
A persistent challenge in this work is that the number of borrowing events in
SC is much smaller than the number of reviews on Goodreads. Since most
books are borrowed rarely, many of the interactions between books are even
more sparse and potentially noisy. We calculate Jensen-Shannon divergence
between each book’s distributions over co-occurring books after adding a
small constant (0.01) to all vector entries to make the problem well-posed
with a uniform prior. We limit this analysis to only the 216 books in the top
quartile of popularity in both datasets (that is, books borrowed at least four
times in SC and rated at least 2,600 times in the UCSD Book Graph) in order
to focus on reading patterns of enduringly popular books.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Table 9. The popular books with the lowest Jensen-Shannon divergence have the most similar distributions over co-occurring books.
Rank

Divergence

SC
neighbors

GR
neighbors

Title

Author

1

0.3787

744

390

A High Wind in Jamaica

Richard Hughes

2

0.3855

662

590

As I Lay Dying

William Faulkner

3

0.3863

704

455

Light in August

William Faulkner

4

0.3909

526

407

Barchester Towers

Anthony Trollope

5

0.3918

915

581

A Portrait of the Artist as a Young
Man

James Joyce

6

0.3928

656

428

A Handful of Dust

Evelyn Waugh

7

0.3928

872

587

A Farewell to Arms

Ernest
Hemingway

8

0.3930

681

357

The Way of All Flesh

Samuel Butler

9

0.3935

750

317

The Rainbow

D. H. Lawrence

10

0.3960

862

349

Sanctuary

William Faulkner

Table 10. The books most frequently interacted with by people who read Light in August by William Faulkner, a book with high neighbor
similarity across SC and Goodreads.
Rank

Shakespeare and Company

Goodreads

1

Sanctuary by William Faulkner

As I Lay Dying by William Faulkner

2

Men Without Women by Ernest Hemingway

The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald

3

As I Lay Dying by William Faulkner

The Sound and the Fury by William Faulkner

4

A Farewell to Arms by Ernest Hemingway

Jane Eyre by Charlotte Brontë

5

The Years by Virginia Woolf

The Sun Also Rises by Ernest Hemingway

Books with the most similar distributions across SC and Goodreads are listed
in Table 9. These popular books were popular in the same way in SC and
Goodreads: often extremely popular and read in conjunction with the same
sets of other popular books.
Even the books with the most similar reading patterns nevertheless have
noticeably different neighbors in the two datasets. For example, in both
datasets, Light in August (1932) by William Faulkner is read by people
who also read Hemingway and other works by Faulkner (table 10). But in
SC, top neighbors include now-less-popular works such as Sanctuary (1931)
and Men Without Women (1927). In Goodreads, the neighborhood instead
includes The Sound and the Fury (1929) and The Sun Also Rises (1926). The
contemporary but now-less-read The Years (1937) by Virginia Woolf appears
in SC, while the much older but now-more-popular Jane Eyre (1847) is more
related in Goodreads.
The books with the highest divergence have the most dissimilar distributions
across SC and Goodreads, often due to differences in popularity (table 11).
Some of these books, such as The Picture of Dorian Gray (1891), Hamlet, and
The Age of Innocence, have become “classics” in Goodreads and are read in
the company of other “classics.” Others were popular in SC but have faded in

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Table 11. The popular books with the highest Jensen-Shannon divergence have the most dissimilar distributions over co-occurring books.
Rank

Divergence

SC
neighbors

GR
neighbors

Title

Author

1

0.5479

185

210

The Varieties of Religious Experience

William James

2

0.5447

118

146

Gitanjali

Rabindranath
Tagore

3

0.5413

276

68

The Picture of Dorian Gray

Oscar Wilde

4

0.5383

152

277

Salomé

Oscar Wilde

5

0.5379

202

212

Oil!

Upton Sinclair

6

0.5374

120

114

Selected Poems

Ezra Pound

7

0.5374

372

556

Hamlet

William
Shakespeare

8

0.5309

41

190

The Guermantes Way (À la recherche du
temps perdu 3)

Marcel Proust

9

0.5260

78

611

The Age of Innocence

Edith Wharton

10

0.5230

252

152

Untouchable

Mulk Raj Anand

Goodreads popularity. This category includes both popular books and lesserknown works of still-popular authors, like Oscar Wilde’s Salomé (1891) and
Upton Sinclair’s Oil! (1927).
Books with high divergence have very different top neighbors, as can be seen
in the table below for Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray, one of the books
with the most dissimilar distributions (table 12). We see in this case a clear
example of a book that, for SC readers, was a living contemporary novel, but
today has become primarily a classroom classic.
Table 12. The books most frequently interacted with by people who read Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray, a
book with low neighbor similarity across SC and Goodreads.
Rank

Shakespeare and Company

Goodreads

1

Tobacco Road by Erskine Preston Caldwell

The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald

2

The Way of All Flesh by Samuel Butler

Jane Eyre by Charlotte Brontë

3

The Maurizius Case by Jakob Wassermann

Brave New World by Aldous Huxley

4

The Idiot by Fyodor Dostoyevsky

Emma by Jane Austen

5

The Charterhouse of Parma by Stendhal

Crime and Punishment by Fyodor Dostoyevsky

Comparing Network Roles of Popular Books
In the previous sections, we examined books individually and in the context
of their network neighbors. In this final section, we compare the properties
of the two readership networks in their entirety. One method for describing a
network is to identify its core-periphery structure (Borgatti and Everett). We
divide the SC network into books that were highly connected to each other
through shared readership (the core) and other books that were connected
to the core but not to each other (the periphery) using an algorithm that
infers a distribution over five nested layers for each node (Gallagher et al.).
The innermost layer (layer one) represents the books assigned to the core
while the outermost layer (layer five) includes books assigned to the periphery.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Table 13. The books with highest coreness in the SC network.
Year

Title

Author

Coreness

Borrower Events

1930

Diary of a Provincial Lady

E. M. Delafield

0.905

13

1937

Famine

Liam O’Flaherty

0.905

6

1931

Back Street

Fannie Hurst

0.905

6

1939

Beware of Pity

Stefan Zweig

0.905

5

1928

Debonair: The Story of Persephone

G. B. Stern

0.905

3

1926

The Sun Also Rises

Ernest Hemingway

0.9

29

1915

The Rainbow

D. H. Lawrence

0.9

16

1925

Manhattan Transfer

John Dos Passos

0.895

26

1925

The Great Gatsby

F. Scott Fitzgerald

0.895

10

1885

Marius the Epicurean

Walter Pater

0.895

7

The layers between the core and periphery (layers two–four) suggest a book’s
position in a range from core to periphery. We find that books with high
average coreness in the SC network tend to have been published in the 1920s
and 1930s, but we also find that some of these books were rarely borrowed in
SC (table 13).
The most core books range in popularity within SC, but were consistently
read by SC’s top two readers, Alice M. Killen and France Emma Raphaël
(table 14). Killen and Raphaël were the most prolific borrowers, with 1,480
and 999 borrow events respectively (compared to a median of just nine
borrow events across other SC members). Both women were SC members
for decades (Killen from 1922–1940, Raphaël from 1920–1942). Killen
borrowed 377 and Raphaël borrowed 283 of the books shared between SC
and Goodreads; 134 of these books overlap between the two readers.
Though relatively little information about either woman survives today, we
know that Killen published a graduate thesis on gothic literature in 1915
and kept in touch with Sylvia Beach during Killen’s vacations to Ireland
(Killen, Le roman terrifiant; Killen, Letters to Beach). Raphaël was an artist
and sculptor, and amanuensis for James Joyce (“France Emma Raphaël”).
Between 1933–37, Raphaël transcribed Joyce’s notebooks; her transcriptions
aided Joyce in the drafting of Finnegans Wake (1939). Some scholarship on
Joyce discusses Raphaël’s role in the composition of Finnegans Wake, given
the prevalence of mistakes Raphaël apparently made during transcription
(e.g., “colour of hair & voice” transcribed as “Colonel if have a voice” [Tigges;
Rose]). However, Raphaël’s errors “may have delighted Joyce more than
[they] disturbed him” (Tigges). Because Killen and Raphaël individually had
high book-borrowing rates and read many of the same books, together their
readership creates the dense core of books identified by the core-periphery
model.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Table 14. Number of SC books assigned to each layer in comparison to the number of books in that layer read by Killen or Raphaël. These
numbers only include books that were co-reviewed or co-borrowed in both Goodreads and SC.
Core-Periphery Layer

Total Books

Killen

Raphaël

1

231

231

124

2

146

146

10

3

197

0

149

4

371

0

0

5

566

0

0

Figure 5. Spearman correlation coefficients between network coreness and centrality measures and books read by Killen
and Raphaël. “Killen and Raphaël” refers to books checked out by Killen and/or Raphaël.

Regardless of whether a book was unpopular among SC and Goodreads
readers (Debonair: The Story of Persephone [1928]), gained popularity over
time (The Great Gatsby), or was popular both in SC and Goodreads (The
Sun Also Rises), the most “core” books were borrowed by both Killen and
Raphaël. Indeed, other network centrality measures, including betweenness
centrality, degree centrality, and eigenvector centrality, also rank books
borrowed by both Raphaël and Killen highest, though high-centrality books
tend to have been more popular with SC readers in general (fig. 5).
Given their twenty-year overlap at SC, adjacent addresses, and high overlap
of books borrowed, we can speculate that the two women likely shared
and discussed SC books (fig. 6). Killen and Raphaël consecutively borrowed
otherwise unpopular books (Stefan Zweig’s Beware of Pity [1939]; G. B.
Stern’s Debonair: The Story of Persephone) within five days of each other.
From 1934–1940, a third reader, Françoise de Marcilly, was also likely
associated with Killen and Raphaël, though Marcilly’s reading habits did not
Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

Figure 6. Addresses listed in Paris for Killen (8 rue Léopold Robert, Paris 14e), Raphaël (40 rue Boissonade, Paris 14e),
and SC (12 rue de l’Odéon, Paris 6e). Raphaël’s extant membership cards also locate her on the same block, at 18 rue
Boissonade, from 1929–1935, and another address, further away from SC, in 1926. Raphaël and Killen have addresses
listed outside of Paris, in Southern France and Ireland, respectively.

have the same impact on the SC network. For example, on April 8, 1936,
Marcilly returned Charles Morgan’s Sparkenbroke (1936). On the same day,
Raphaël borrowed Sparkenbroke, returning it on April 15; Killen borrowed
the book five days later. The three women also co-read other books that were
unpopular in SC, such as H. M. Tomlinson’s The Sea and the Jungle (1912),
which was borrowed only five times; Killen, Raphaël, and Marcilly account
for three of these events (the other two borrowers were Ernest Hemingway
and Giorgio Joyce, James Joyce’s son).
Of all books borrowed at SC, Killen and Raphaël read books published
in a narrower range of years, usually preferring contemporary works. The
median publication date of all books in SC is 1921, while the median
publication year of books borrowed by Killen was 1926 and by Raphaël,
1928. Comparing the popularity of their borrowed books across SC and
Goodreads, we find that the books Killen and Raphaël borrowed usually
fell in popularity, though this result is influenced by their preference for
contemporary works (which, as previously observed, tend to have fallen in
popularity more than have earlier titles). The members whose borrowed
books rose most in popularity (Isabelle Zimmer, Dorothy Dudley Harvey,
and Nathalie Sarraute) read comparatively few books relative to Killen and

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

1

Raphaël, who read widely across contemporary works available at SC.
Characteristics of Killen and Raphaël’s borrowing habits distinguish the pair
from the average SC reader, given the scale of their borrowing, their tendency
to borrow contemporary work, and the lessened popularity of books they
borrowed over time. Still, the borrowing attributes that distinguish them also
emphasize their similar reading habits, strengthening the likelihood that they
influenced each other’s reading by sharing and recommending books.
When applied to the SC network, our network significance measures behave
surprisingly, revealing more about two prominent readers than about the
network as a whole. While network analysis measures such as centrality and
core-periphery structure usually allow for a birds-eye-view of a network,
in this case they magnify the readership of two prolific book-borrowers.
Though there is little extant information about either Killen or Raphaël, their
prominent position in the SC book network emphasizes the frequency and
longevity of their book-borrowing from SC. They, and their relationship,
merit further study.

Conclusion
By putting an interwar Parisian lending library in conversation with a large,
contemporary social reading website, we can compare reception over time,
place, and audience. Books that were more popular in SC tend to be
experimental and written at the time SC was active, while those that became
more popular on Goodreads are older and now marked by the crowd as
“classics” and “school” books. By looking at patterns of co-readership, we
find variability in the process of canonization. Some works, such as those
by Faulkner and Hemingway, largely retain their original context—they are
read today in much the same literary company they enjoyed in SC’s Paris.
Others are more disconnected from their contemporary literature, becoming
“timeless” as readers associate them with important (or widely taught),
temporally varied peers.
The approaches we have employed provide a data-driven window into both
the prescience and influential taste of a historical community, as well as
its passing obsessions. These results offer insights, but also highlight the
limitations of the datasets and the difficulties of making meaningful
comparisons between them. While there remain questions about the role
of computational approaches in the study of literature itself, we believe the
use of digital methods for the study of the reception of literature is both
necessary and powerful. The Goodreads dataset is fundamentally mediated
by computation; it would be impossible to approach in any other way. Even

1 We identify SC members whose borrowed books rose most in rank by first filtering to only those members who had at least ten borrowing

events and then, for each book they borrowed, calculating that book’s change in popularity rank from SC to Goodreads. We then take the
mean of these scores for each SC member.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

at the smaller scale of SC, we have enough data (thousands of records about
thousands of books; an induced network of millions of possible interactions)
from which computational analysis can reveal unexpected details. But in
stretching the limits of quantitative comparison, we nevertheless reach a point
where our methods tell us less about literature and reception, and more about
two neighbors walking through the park to pick up the week’s new novel.
Data repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/EZSAL2
Submitted: January 08, 2024 EDT, Accepted: February 06, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership

works cited
Antoniak, Maria, et al. “Tags, Borders, and Catalogs: Social Re-Working of Genre on
LibraryThing.” Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 5, no. 29, 2021,
pp. 1–29, https://doi.org/10.1145/3449103.
Borgatti, Stephen P., and Martin G. Everett. “Models of Core/Periphery Structures.” Social
Networks, vol. 21, no. 4, 2000, pp. 375–95, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-8733(99)00019-2.
Chang, Kent K., and Simon DeDeo. “Divergence and the Complexity of Difference in Text and
Culture.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 5, no. 2, 2020, pp. 1–36, https://doi.org/10.22148/
001c.17585.
“France Emma Raphaël.” ArtNet, 28 Dec. 2020, http://artnet.com/artists/france-emma-raphaël/.
Gallagher, Ryan J., et al. “A Clarified Typology of Core-Periphery Structure in Networks.” Science
Advances, vol. 7, no. 12, 2021, pp. 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abc9800.
Guillory, John. Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation. U of Chicago P, 1993,
https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226310015.001.0001.
Killen, Alice M. Le roman terrifiant ou, roman noir de Walpole à Anne Radcliffe et son influence sur
la littérature française jusqu’en 1840. Champion, 1924.
---. Letters to Sylvia Beach. Sylvia Beach Papers, Special Collections, Princeton University Library,
box 23, folder 26.
Kotin, Joshua, and Rebecca Sutton Koeser. “The Shakespeare and Company Lending Library Cards
in Context.” Shakespeare and Company Project, 9 Mar. 2020,
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/analysis/2020/03/shakespeare-and-company-lendinglibrary-cards-context/.
“Publishers Weekly List of Bestselling Novels in the United States in the 1920s.” Wikipedia, 2 Nov.
2022, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Publishers_Weekly_list_of_bestselling_novels_in_the_United_States_in_the_1920s.
Rose, Danis. “The Raphael Transcriptions: ‘Flexionals’ into ‘Fleas and Snails.’” The Textual Diaries
of James Joyce, edited by Danis Rose, The Lilliput Press, 1995, pp. 161–89.
Tigges, Wim. “James Joyce, Mme Raphael, Danis Rose, and the Fallacy of First-Draft Authority.”
James Joyce Quarterly, vol. 35, no. 4, 1998, pp. 834–40.
Walsh, Melanie, and Maria Antoniak. “The Goodreads ‘Classics’: A Computational Study of
Readers, Amazon, and Crowdsourced Amateur Criticism.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 6,
no. 2, 2021, pp. 243–87, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.22221.
Wan, Mengting, and Julian McAuley. “Item Recommendation on Monotonic Behavior Chains.”
Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, 2018, pp. 86–94,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3240323.3240369.
Wan, Menting, et al. “Fine-Grained Spoiler Detection from Large-Scale Review Corpora.”
Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, July
2019, pp. 2605–10, https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1248.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

