Kotin, Joshua, and Rebecca Sutton Koeser. “The World of Shakespeare and Company:
An Introduction.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116905.

ARTICLE

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction
Joshua Kotin1, Rebecca Sutton Koeser1
1 Princeton University

Keywords: Shakespeare and Company, Sylvia Beach, archives, libraries, modernism, digital humanities, readers
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116905

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 2, 2024

What’s left to learn about Shakespeare and Company, Sylvia Beach’s bookshop
and lending library in interwar Paris? This introduction addresses this question
by discussing the eight articles collected in the special cluster, “The World of
Shakespeare and Company,” co-published by the Journal of Cultural Analytics
and Modernism/modernity. All eight articles use data from the Shakespeare and
Company Project to develop new accounts of modernism, the sociology of
reading, and historical archives. Combining qualitative, quantitative, and
computational methods, the articles open new paths for studying one of the
most important institutions in literary history.

I
What’s left to learn about Shakespeare and Company, Sylvia Beach’s
bookshop and lending library in interwar Paris?
The story of Shakespeare and Company has been told and retold—by Beach
herself in Shakespeare and Company (1959) and The Letters of Sylvia Beach
(2010), by Noël Riley Fitch in Sylvia Beach and the Lost Generation (1984),
and by Laure Murat in Passage de l’Odéon (2003). Ernest Hemingway
mythologized the bookshop and lending library in A Moveable Feast (1964),
and Woody Allen satirized that mythology in Midnight in Paris (2011).
Countless writers have described Beach’s publication of James Joyce’s Ulysses
(1922): Richard Ellmann in James Joyce (1959), Kevin Birmingham in The
Most Dangerous Book (2014), Keri Maher in The Paris Bookseller (2022)—to
name just three. In the aftermath of the Ulysses centennial, we might assume
we know all there is to know about Beach’s “famous bookshop and lending
library on the Left Bank” (“The New Books” 2).
This cluster of articles, co-published by the Journal of Cultural Analytics and
Modernism/modernity, challenges that assumption. The cluster focuses on
Beach’s archives at Princeton University through the lens of the Shakespeare
and Company Project, a digital humanities initiative that details the lending
1
library’s operations, including what its members read and where they lived.
By analyzing documents and data provided by the Project, the cluster does not

1 For a history of the Shakespeare and Company Project and an account of its datasets, see Kotin and Koeser, “Data Sets.”

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

simply deepen standard accounts of Shakespeare and Company and its world;
it presents new stories and asks new questions that alter our understanding
of the institution and its impact, and establish its relevance to present-day
debates in literary history and theory.
Reading the cluster, we gain new insights into canonical authors and the
modernist canon. (One article, for instance, compares Virginia Woolf’s theory
of the “common reader” to her actual readers in Paris.) We discover how
members of the lending library influenced the reception of modernist
literature, and how reading can influence personal identity. (An article
examines the reading practices of Reed Peggram, a queer African American
scholar studying in Paris.) We also learn about Shakespeare and Company’s
influence on various communities and movements, including a transnational
Black avant-garde. Finally, we discover how Beach’s obsessive yet incomplete
record keeping can help us develop tools to compensate for and interpret the
gaps that perforate almost all historical archives and cultural datasets.
The cluster also contributes to debates about methodology. Articles embrace
a range of methods, illuminating ways to attend to individual and often
ephemeral documents—a borrowing record, a letter—as well as large
collections of documents organized and curated into datasets. These
qualitative, quantitative, and computational methods are not in competition.
The cluster demonstrates how a commitment to interdisciplinary and
collaborative research, whether jointly authored articles or coordinated
responses to a common object, can move literary studies in new directions.
The joint publication of this cluster by the leading journals in modernist
studies and cultural analytics further demonstrates this commitment.
The cluster, in this way, shows how digital humanities projects can ground
and motivate an astonishing range of research. The Shakespeare and Company
Project is a work of scholarship and an instrument of scholarship. By
interpreting, structuring, and supplementing an extensive and at times
chaotic collection of documents, the Project transforms archival sources into
data. The Project makes this data available for analysis through a user-friendly
web interface and published, carefully documented datasets. Researchers
can work at different scales, embracing both close and distant reading—as
well as what has been variously called “scalable,” “zoomable,” and even
“macroscopic” reading (Mueller; Cordell; Graham et al.). The article on
Woolf begins by close reading a series of lending library records and then
shifts to a medium-scale analysis of the members who borrowed Woolf’s
books. An article comparing readers at Shakespeare and Company to reading
communities today moves in the opposite direction: a large-scale analysis
of borrowing networks reveals a friendship between two lending library
members based on similar reading practices. Even the articles that do not
employ quantitative and computational methods take advantage of the
Project’s data, whether to develop an argument based on the circulation of

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

Figure 1. Shakespeare and Company lending library pamphlet. Lending Library Pamphlet, box 75, folder 8, Sylvia
Beach Papers, Princeton University Library.

a particular book or a single data point such as Beach’s gift of Bryher’s The
Heart to Artemis (1962) to a young literary critic months before Beach’s
death. This is what the best digital humanities projects can do: harness
intellectual and methodological differences to address a common set of
concerns.

II
When Sylvia Beach opened Shakespeare and Company in 1919, it combined
two businesses: a bookshop and a lending library. When she published Ulysses
in 1922, she added a third: publisher. For the next two decades, she balanced
these businesses: ordering and selling books, collecting membership fees, and
printing and reprinting Ulysses. Yet the lending library was always the heart
of the operation. English-language books were expensive to import; a lending
library was the best way to meet the needs of a diverse community of readers
(fig. 1). As Beach recalls in her memoirs, “Lending books . . . was much easier
2
in Paris than selling them” (Beach 21). When Shakespeare and Company
closed in 1941, she stopped selling books altogether, but continued to loan
books from her Paris apartment until her death in 1962.
Beach’s archives ended up at different institutions. In 1951, she donated
5,000 books from the lending library to the American Library in Paris
(“Dispersal”). In 1959, she sold the first of two batches of Joyce material
to the University at Buffalo (James Joyce Collection). (The second batch
followed after her death.) In 1964, Princeton acquired the remainder of

2 In Paris Salons, Cafés, Studios (1928), Sisley Huddleston writes: “French books have, in my time, mounted from 3fr.50 to 12

francs—occasionally 15 francs—rarely more. But the cheapest English or American book works out in French money to 60 or 70 francs,
and often it is well over 100 francs” (208).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

Figure 2. Princeton librarian Howard C. Rice in Beach’s apartment, 1964. “The Dispersal of Sylvia Beach’s Books.”
Rare Book Collections @ Princeton, 6 Jan. 2011, https://blogs.princeton.edu/rarebooks/2011/01/the-dispesal-of-sylviabeachs/.

her archives, including her personal library (fig. 2). Princeton then donated
between 3,000 and 4,000 lending library books to the University of Paris and
consigned another group to a rare book dealer. In 1986, the Harry Ransom
Center at the University of Texas acquired a collection of Shakespeare and
Company material from Beach’s friend, Maurice Saillet (“Dispersal”).
The Beach Papers at Princeton’s Firestone Library are vast—78.3 linear feet
of documents, plus 1,500 books from Beach’s personal library. In contrast,
the James Joyce Collection at Buffalo consists of 22.25 linear feet of
documents, and the Saillet collection at the Ransom Center, 1.68 linear feet
of documents. The Beach Papers include correspondence, memoir drafts,
family and personal records, photographs, and extensive business records.
These business records detail the daily operations of Shakespeare and
Company, including the lending library.
Three sets of sources drawn from those business records provide the
foundation for the Shakespeare and Company Project. Lending library cards
document the borrowing activity and addresses of lending library members.
Ernest Hemingway’s card from 1925 is representative (fig. 3). His name
appears at the top next to his membership dates, followed by his addresses.
(When he moved, Beach or an assistant would cross out the old address
and write the new one.) Below the addresses, three columns document his
borrowing activity: borrow date, book title, return date. “BB” stands for
“brought back.”

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

Figure 3. Ernest Hemingway’s lending library card, 1925, annotated. “Lending Library Cards,” Shakespeare and
Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023),
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/sources/cards/.

This particular card captures Hemingway immersing himself in books by
Ivan Turgenev in Paris and on vacation at the Hotel Rössli in Gstaad. (He
skied during the day and read at night [Reynolds 97].) Subsequent cards
show him borrowing more Turgenev alongside books by Violet Hunt, W. B.
Yeats, and James Huneker, among others, and returning to Paris to settle for
a time at 6 rue Férou in the sixth arrondissement. The cards, thus, chart an
intellectual journey as well as a literal one.
The Beach Papers include Lending Library Cards for over 600 members.
The names are a who’s who of American expatriates associated with the Lost
Generation: Gertrude Stein, Archibald MacLeish, Janet Flanner, Glenway
Wescott, Ezra Pound. Other names are more surprising, yet just as famous:
Claude Cahun, Walter Benjamin, Aimé Césaire, Emma Goldman, Jacques
Lacan, Maurice Merleau-Ponty. And some names are still just names,
unconnected to specific biographies: a Mrs. Jackson, a Thomas Edwards, a
Comtesse de Raousset. Together, the cards reveal the reading practices of a
diverse community during the consolidation of modernism.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

Figure 4. Logbook revenue page, 1922, annotated. “Logbooks,” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital
Humanities, Princeton University (2023), https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/sources/logbooks/

But the lending library cards are incomplete. Shakespeare and Company had
thousands of members. Beach did not preserve all their cards. Hemingway
is a case in point: he joined in 1921, but his first extant card is from
1925. To compensate for these gaps, the Shakespeare and Company Project
uses a second set of sources: logbooks The logbooks track daily revenue
and expenditures, including all the lending library memberships, renewals,
deposits, and reimbursements (fig. 4). As a result, they offer a portrait of the
lending library community and finances.
This particular logbook page from 1922 shows the revenue for the first few
days in February, including February 2—the day Beach published Ulysses. On
that historic day, three members renewed their memberships, paying 8 francs
each to borrow one book at a time for a period of one month. The page
also shows fines and books sold. The logbooks, in this way, present a nearly
comprehensive, yet comparatively superficial, portrait of the lending library:
names and dates, but no borrowing activity or addresses. The logbooks are
also incomplete: the Beach Papers do not include logbooks for 1931, 1932, or
1937. Nevertheless, they complement the lending library cards and improve
our understanding of Shakespeare and Company and its world.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

Figure 5. Pre-1936 address book page, annotated. “Address Books,” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for
Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023), https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/sources/address-books/.

The third set of sources—address books and lending library
inventories—help fill gaps in the lending library card and logbook record.
Two address books are especially useful, supplying names and addresses,
and confirming membership dates. One of these address books focuses on
members who joined before 1936 and the other on members who joined after
1936.
This page from the pre-1936 address book shows members with last names
beginning with the letter “A” (fig. 5). The photographer Berenice Abbott is
listed first: the entry is the only record of her membership. The inventories, in
turn, help identify the books that circulated in the lending library, including
books not listed on extant cards. (Beach only included book titles on the
cards, making identification difficult at times.) Yet even these additional
sources are incomplete. The pre-1936 address book, for example, stops
abruptly at “M.” As a result, the Project has more addresses for members from
the first half of the alphabet than the second. The final article in the cluster
discusses the significance of these gaps and how to respond to them.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

The Project makes all this information about the lending library available to
the public through a web interface, including images of the lending library
cards. The Project also supplements information from archival sources with
bibliographic and demographic details about individual books and members.
(The Project has so far matched over fourteen hundred member names
to actual biographies, and continues to identify members.) Visitors to the
site can search for particular members and books, and delimit by various
criteria—membership year, birth year, nationality, and arrondissement for
members, and circulation year for books. The Project also makes all the
information available in three datasets, which allow for more robust analysis.
These datasets are the basis for the quantitative and computational research
3
in this cluster.
The fact that the lending library information exists at all is astonishing. The
records of few historical libraries survive, and for good reason: the American
Library Association requires libraries to destroy their records to protect the
privacy of their patrons (“Privacy Tool Kit” 34). Beach did not adhere to this
requirement—a fact that Ethelene Whitmire discusses in her article about
Reed Peggram in this cluster. But perhaps even more astonishing is that
Shakespeare and Company turned out to be Shakespeare and Company: one
of the most important institutions in literary history.
The Shakespeare and Company Project dispels several popular misconceptions
about the bookshop and lending library. Shakespeare and Company didn’t
only serve a coterie of American expatriates. Beach loaned books to more
than 5,000 lending library members from over forty-five different countries.
A significant number of members were French—indeed, if you were to visit
Shakespeare and Company on a random day, you’d be almost as likely meet
a French intellectual as an American tourist or expatriate. Most members
of Shakespeare and Company were not part of the “Lost Generation”—the
generation born between 1883 and 1900. Based on the Project’s most recent
demographic information, over sixty percent of members were born either
before or after that period. (The oldest member, born in 1849, was Edmond
Renoir, Auguste Renoir’s brother. The youngest, born in 1942, was Julia
Wright, Richard Wright’s daughter: she visited Shakespeare and Company
with her father and borrowed children’s books.) Members did not only
borrow modernist novels and poetry. Margaret Mitchell’s Gone with the
Wind (1936) circulated as frequently as Ernest Hemingway’s A Farewell to
Arms (1929). P. G. Wodehouse was as popular as Gertrude Stein. Stein even

3 Most articles in this cluster use version 1.1 of the Shakespeare and Company Project datasets, which were published in January 2021; a few

articles use version 1.2, which was published in January 2022. In 2024, version 2.0 will be published; this version includes new
identifications of a significant number of members, as well as additional information about the books that circulated in the lending library.
These enhancements, however, do not significantly impact the arguments or conclusions in the articles.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

borrowed a novel by Wodehouse! These examples only scratch the surface.
As the articles in the cluster demonstrate, the Project transforms standard
accounts of Shakespeare and Company and even modernism itself.

III
The cluster begins with three articles about individual authors, readers,
and books. In “Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris,” a team of
scholars—Helen Southworth, Alice Staveley, Matthew N. Hannah, Claire
Battershill, and Elizabeth Willson Gordon—analyze Woolf’s reception in
Paris in light of her notion of the “common reader.” The article details
the lives and practices of Woolf’s readers as it addresses questions “about
how books find their readers (and readers find their books).” In “Unpacking
Reed Peggram’s Library,” Ethelene Whitmire investigates the connection
between bibliography and biography in light of Peggram’s borrowing records
at Shakespeare and Company. “How much can we learn about a person
by knowing what that person read?” she asks. The article also discusses
the voyeuristic aspects of the investigation, which conflict with Whitmire’s
training as a librarian. In “Shakespeare and Company’s Final Book,” Keri
Walsh analyzes the final data point in the Shakespeare and Company Project
datasets: Beach’s gift of Bryher’s The Heart to Artemis to the critic JeanDominique Rey in 1962. The article uses the data point to discuss Beach’s
feminism and her intervention in the canonization of modernist literature.
Walsh’s interest in canonization provides a link to the next two articles in the
cluster, which use quantitative and computational methods to understand
the connection between reading practices at Shakespeare and Company and
reading practices today. In “A Counterfactual Canon,” Fedor Karmanov
and Joshua Kotin analyze the lending library’s gender demographics. The
article speculates about the influence of male readers on the canonization of
female writers, and reveals a counterfactual canon of modernism: books by
women that were more popular among women than men. In “The Afterlives
of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership,” another team
of scholars—Maria Antoniak, David Mimno, Rosamond Thalken, Melanie
Walsh, Matthew Wilkens, and Gregory Yauney—connect data from the
Shakespeare and Company Project to data from Goodreads and LibraryThing
to examine changes in the popularity of books over time and the difference
between popularity and canonicity. The article is packed with discoveries,
including that the reading preferences of lending library members predicted
the books that are considered “classics” today.
The next two articles in the cluster shift the focus from canons to
communities. In “Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company,”
Caitlin O’Keefe examines the network of Black writers and intellectuals
who patronized Shakespeare and Company, and the books by Black writers
available to borrow and purchase. The article connects the “Lost Generation”
to “Paris noir,” and illuminates how literature of the Harlem Renaissance
Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

reached writers associated with Négritude. In “Lending Books on the Right
and Left Banks,” Nissa Ren Cannon compares Shakespeare and Company
to its Right Bank counterpart: the American Library in Paris. The article
outlines how the two lending libraries complemented each other.
The cluster ends with an article about the Shakespeare and Company Project
data itself. In “Missing Data, Speculative Reading,” Rebecca Sutton Koeser
and Zoe LeBlanc reckon with gaps in the Beach Papers, using computational
methods to estimate the contours of a complete dataset. The article ultimately
presents a theory of “archival absences” and a set of tools to understand and
address them. Speculative reading, the authors write, is “a way of modeling
missing data, while remaining open to new ways of imagining and theorizing
the archive.” The article concludes with “an experiment in knowledge
creation.” Koeser and LeBlanc use tools designed to forecast future
interactions to predict the past, specifically the books on Hemingway’s
missing lending library cards from the early 1920s.
With the publication of this cluster, do we finally now know all there is to
know about Beach’s famous bookshop and lending library? Of course not.
By posing and addressing new questions about Shakespeare and Company,
the cluster opens new paths for future research, while modeling how to
conduct that research. We are excited about work currently underway that
uses addresses in the Shakespeare and Company Project datasets to analyze
the connection between geography and taste, and look forward to following
work that engages the next update of the datasets. Once we begin looking at
Shakespeare and Company through the lens of the Shakespeare and Company
Project, new stories and questions constantly come into view.

Acknowledgements
We thank the many people who have helped build and refine the Shakespeare
and Company Project over the last ten years. (A full list is available on the
Project’s credits page.) We also thank the editors at the Journal of Cultural
Analytics and Modernism/modernity for supporting the cluster and copublication. Finally, we thank Emily Lobb for coordinating co-publication in
the two journals.
Submitted: January 08, 2024 EDT, Accepted: February 12, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

The World of Shakespeare and Company: An Introduction

works cited
“Address Books.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton
University, 2023, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/sources/address-books/.
Beach, Sylvia. Shakespeare and Company. University of Nebraska Press, 1991.
Cordell, Ryan C. “What Makes Computational Evidence Significant for Literary-Historical
Argument?” Ryan C. Cordell, 27 July 2017, https://ryancordell.org/research/dh/computationalevidence-for-literary-historical-argument/.
Graham, Shawn, et al. Exploring Big Historical Data: The Historian’s Macroscope. 2nd ed., World
Scientific, 2022, https://doi.org/10.1142/12435.
Huddleston, Sisley. Paris Salons, Cafés, Studios. J. B. Lippincott, 1928.
James Joyce Collection. University at Buffalo, Digital Collections, https://digital.lib.buffalo.edu/
collection/LIB-PC004/.
Kotin, Joshua, and Rebecca Sutton Koeser. “Shakespeare and Company Project Data Sets.” Journal
of Cultural Analytics, vol. 7, no. 1, 2022, pp. 1–35, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.32551.
“Lending Library Cards.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities,
Princeton University, 2023, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/sources/cards/.
Lending Library Flyer. Sylvia Beach Papers, Special Collections, Princeton University Library, box
75, folder 8.
“Logbooks.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton
University, 2023, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/sources/logbooks/.
Mueller, Martin. “Shakespeare His Contemporaries: Collaborative Curation and Exploration of
Early Modern Drama in a Digital Environment.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 8, no. 3,
2014, http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/8/3/000183/000183.html.
“Privacy Tool Kit.” American Library Association, 5 May 2005, https://web.archive.org/web/
20141204151225/https://www.ala.org/advocacy/sites/ala.org.advocacy/files/content/
privacyconfidentiality/toolkitsprivacy/privacytoolkit.pdf.
Reynolds, Michael. Hemingway: The Homecoming. Norton, 1992.
“The Dispersal of Sylvia Beach’s Books.” Rare Book Collections @ Princeton, 6 Jan. 2011,
https://blogs.princeton.edu/rarebooks/2011/01/the-dispesal-of-sylvia-beachs/.
“The New Books at Sylvia Beach’s Famous Bookshop and Lending Library.” New York Herald
Tribune, 18 May 1936.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

