Southworth, Helen, et al. “Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris.” Journal of
Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116908.

ARTICLE

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris
Helen Southworth1, Alice Staveley2, Matthew N. Hannah3, Claire Battershill4, Elizabeth Willson Gordon5
1 University of Oregon, 2 Stanford University, 3 Purdue University West Lafayette, 4 University of Toronto, 5 King’s University

Keywords: Shakespeare and Company, Sylvia Beach, readers and reading, Virginia Woolf, feminism, archives, bookshops, libraries, digital humanities, modernism
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116908

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 2, 2024

In this article, we analyze historical, biographical, geolocational, and book
distribution data from the Shakespeare and Company Project to understand
Virginia Woolf’s readership in Paris in the 1920s and 1930s. The lending library
cards from Sylvia Beach’s archive reveal the names of Woolf’s readers, and
include important information about their reading habits and professional lives.
The article uses a mixed-methods approach, combining historical and archival
research on individual readers with visualizations of demographic, literary, and
geographical data. Datasets from the Shakespeare and Company Project provide
unique access to the networks of distribution, circulation, and readership that
defined Woolf’s literary presence in Paris. These networks, in turn, resonate
with Woolf’s own deep interest in her various readerships and publics.

Prologue: A Woman “on a refuge”
On July 27, 1927, Vita Sackville-West wrote to Virginia Woolf, describing an
unexpected encounter:
Today as I was driving down Oxford Street I saw a woman
on a refuge, carrying [To the] Lighthouse. She was an unknown
woman – up from the country, I should think, and just been
to Mudie’s or the Times, – and as the policeman held me up
with his white glove I saw your name staring at me, Virginia
Woolf, against the moving red buses, in Vanessa’s paraph of
lettering. Then as I stayed (with my foot pressing down the
clutch and my hand on the brake, as you will appreciate), I
got an intense dizzying vision of you: you in your basement,
writing; you in your shed at Rodmell, writing; writing those
words which that woman was carrying home to read. How
had she got the book? Had she stalked in, purposeful, and said
“I want To the Lighthouse” or had she strayed idly up to the
counter and said “I want a novel please, to read in the train,
– a new novel, – anything’ll do”? Anyhow there it was, one
of the eight thousand, in the hands of the Public. (Woolf and
Sackville-West 124)
Sackville-West depicts this “unknown woman” standing on a refuge (or traffic
island) in the middle of the road in the heart of London’s commercial
district holding a copy of Woolf’s novel, To the Lighthouse, published just

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

two months prior on May 5, 1927. The sighting is semi-erotic—“an intense
dizzying vision”—and leads Sackville-West to contemplate where, how, with
what purpose, and to what end “that woman”—an anonymous reader of
Woolf’s now considerable “Public”—had acquired a copy of the novel. Her
vertiginous reaction arises in part from a conflict between access and
admonition. Being stopped by the policeman allows her to spy the novel
in the woman’s hands, but the regulatory prohibition embodied by his
white-gloved hand amplifies the estranging effect of the book’s dust jacket.
Its distinctive “paraph”—Vanessa Bell’s elegant lettering—transmutes Woolf,
lover and friend, into the more distant and replicable Woolf, esteemed author.
This defamiliarizing scene opens up questions, not just about the relationship
between authors and readers, and about celebrity and desire, but about
how books find their readers (and readers find their books): whether from
bookshops or, as Sackville-West attests here, from prominent lending
libraries, one of the more common, but now often forgotten, sites of
1
modernist book circulation. The Times Book Club and Mudies were
subscription libraries whose Oxford Street storefronts were themselves
cultural landmarks. Sackville-West conjures intimate scenes behind the
composition of To the Lighthouse only she can know, but her inquiries point
outwards to the spaces where anonymous common readers, their Woolf titles
on loan and tucked beneath their arms, will come to shape their own private
connections with her works. Sackville-West—in her full-circle reckoning with
how the woman on the refuge embodies what Leah Price calls the “social
life of books” (34)—finds comfort and resolution in what we might think of
as the production cycle of the book, transiting from the hands of the one
to the hands of the many. Numbers help resolve Sackville-West’s ambivalent
longing—“there it was, one of the eight thousand”—as she lets go of her
own memories of the book before its publication, allowing Woolf to dissolve
among the crowd of readers that the “unknown woman” comes to represent.

Woolf ’s Common Reader and Common Readers
As both novelist and publisher, Woolf understood the stakes of releasing
a book into the world: “once a book is printed and published it ceases to
be the property of the author; he commits it to the care of other people”
(“An Introduction”, 549). As a prolific reviewer, she also participated in
shaping readers’ literary perceptions by popularizing a borrowed conceit—the
common reader—as a liberatory waystation between what she viewed as the
hortatory role of the critic and the authoritative, but riskily authoritarian, role
of the scholar. The common reader is many things: a person, “an abstract
notion, a hypothetical construct,” a “metaphor,” “an alternative pedagogy,”
a way of reading, and a book (Koutsantoni 51; Rosenberg 55; Cuddy-

1 For recent engagements with the circulating and private library cultures of this period, see Whelan; Katz; Eliot; Wilson.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Keane, Woolf 2). In 1925, Woolf published a collection of her reviews as
The Common Reader, followed in 1932 by The Common Reader: Second
Series. The titles allude to Samuel Johnson, whom Woolf quotes in the first
collection’s title essay: “I rejoice to concur with the common reader; for by
the common sense of readers, uncorrupted by literary prejudices, after all
the refinements of subtilty and the dogmatism of learning, must be finally
decided all claim to poetical honors” (“Common Reader” 19). Woolf is
drawn to Johnson’s anti-elitist and anti-institutional language as well as to
his aphoristic appeal, encouraging her readers to tack his words up, Post-it
style, “in all those rooms, too humble to be called libraries, yet full of books”
(19). Woolf makes a metonym of open spaces and open reading; of common
spaces—bookful but not over-regimented—and common readers. An older
sense of the “commons” (shared grazing lands) mingles with the “Commons”
of representative democracy. Mutually constitutive of one another, these
intimate but public spaces are where readers discover communality through
a shared love of books: throw open the private home library so “readers
living in the same neighborhood could use each other’s books,” Woolf boldly
proposes in a BBC radio talk in 1927 (L. Woolf and V. Woolf 242).
Woolf wrote obsessively about reading and was deeply invested in the cultural
formation of the Common Reader, but who were her actual readers? Did
they realize her ambitions for them? Where did they access her books? How
much did they have in common? Important archival work into Woolf’s “fan
mail” by Beth Rigel Daugherty, Anna Snaith, Melba Cuddy-Keane, and
Claire Battershill has opened up the correspondence Woolf received about
her books at the Hogarth Press (to which she frequently replied), enlarging
our appreciation for their “diversity of readers and points of view” (Snaith
2
3). But these readers’ letters, while rich and fascinating documents, can
be picaresque, obscuring the bird’s-eye view of how cultural institutions
(libraries, bookshops, book societies) mediated access to her works. Recent
advances in the digital humanities, however, have allowed scholars to plumb
readership archives in new ways. For instance, recent analysis of the Hogarth
Press’s Order Books mines 33,000 lines of sales data to reveal regional,
national, and international distribution of Woolf’s works (Staveley et al.
“Virginia Woolf”). And the Shakespeare and Company Project reveals the
borrowing habits of members of its famous lending library. In this article, we
investigate how these newly digitized and shareable artifacts from the lending
library generate new interpretations of modernism, reading, biography, and
social history. We explore not only the names of some of Woolf’s Parisian
readers, but how this newly traceable cohort of continental and expatriate
“common readers” reveals uncaptured stories at the complex intersection of
people and books.

2 See Daugherty; Cuddy-Keane, “From Fan-Mail”; Battershill.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Describing eighteenth-century book distribution models, Andrew Piper
argues that “[w]hen we share a book with a friend, we are declaring our
attachment—to an object, an idea, a person. Sharing is a way of going public.
It is what transforms a private reading experience into a public act, however
small or large such publics might be” (90, emphasis added). What is striking
about the digitization of the Shakespeare and Company lending library cards
is the two-fold amplification of this idea of “going public.” The lending cards
depict in granular detail the checking in and out of Woolf titles—the same
title passing through several different hands. The Shakespeare and Company
Project aims to open for scrutiny both the metadata standards used on the
site and the cards themselves as discrete objects to be read closely, their
holographic surfaces sources of endless attention to what other “unculled”
data—unculled not in the sense of untranscribed, but unannotated—they
might contain. In short, the Project “goes public” with cards that depict
a culture of shared contemporary reading practices while giving readers a
century later the means to tell new stories about (some) formerly anonymous
patrons of Beach’s “Famous Bookshop and Lending Library” (“The New
Books” 2). The more we have attended to the cards as data sources, the more
we have also been struck by how much Beach’s entrepreneurialism embodied
common reader traits Woolf so admired: “As a librarian,” writes Noël Riley
Fitch, “Sylvia’s only assets were her love of books and her interest in people.
She had no card catalogue, no reference numbers on her books, no card file.
. . . No formal procedure spoiled the intimacy of her library” (52).
Shakespeare and Company readers can now be viewed both at a distance
and close-up: their personal histories excavated from the whole group of
lending library members. In what follows, we use a combination of the
published datasets and traditional humanities research methods, particularly
biographical research, to reanimate readers’ lives. In so doing, we answer the
question of who among the larger Shakespeare and Company subscriber base
borrowed Woolf. In the spirit of Sackville-West’s fixation on the anonymous
woman on the refuge, we focus our attention initially on Woolf’s To the
Lighthouse, closely reading a few of its particular borrowers. Here the slippage
between borrowers and readers should be briefly noted; while the lending
library cards provide evidence only of borrowers, imagining the reading
experiences of “common readers” was crucial for Woolf as it is for presentday scholars. To the Lighthouse is a novel deeply invested in examining
congruences and dissimilarities in acts of shared reading, rendering it an ideal
text through which to focalize an analysis of digital and analog examinations
of an archival cache of lending cards. While borrowing should not be directly
equated with reading, the borrowing evidence on the cards evokes questions
too about reading and readership that are animated both in the novel and
in the historical excavation of material sources about lending library patrons;
for convenience, therefore, we use the term reader to denote the borrowers
and readers of Woolf’s books. As one of the first of Woolf’s novels to
be translated into French, moreover, and winner of the 1928 Femina Vie
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Heureuse prize, whose jury was composed solely of women, To the Lighthouse
offers an ideal case study to reexamine gender dynamics in the Shakespeare
3
and Company Project records themselves. Poignantly, in the sense that Woolf
called To the Lighthouse “an elegy” for her parents, Beach would have been
in receipt of Woolf’s novel just prior to her own mother’s untimely death
by suicide in 1927. Indeed, it appears that To the Lighthouse was among
the books Beach found on her mother’s bedside table when she died. Beach
subsequently withdrew that particular copy of the novel from circulation
and kept it among her personal effects, suggesting a unique and especially
intimate connection between Shakespeare and Company and Woolf’s semiautobiographical novel.
After looking at To the Lighthouse’s particular readers, we then shift our
attention to the larger corpus of Woolf’s readers in general. We employ data
visualizations and analysis to see what different stories both interactive graphs
and static photographic snapshots reveal about the contours of Woolf’s
collective readership. Toggling between the close-up view and the more
distant or perhaps mid-range view (these data sets are not, after all, terribly
large) helps us to reconceptualize digital archives, not as places to recover a
fixed past, but where instead we might interrogate the historicity of our drive
to open brick and mortar archival artifacts to digital presentation:
Rather than limit our practices to discovering or finding or
“collecting” an a priori reality, producing knowledge
infrastructures such as digital archives gives us a glimpse of a
break in the clouds, a place where we can dream differently the
contexts, controversies, complexities, and conversations that go
into our sense-making. (Verhoeven 17–18)
In this spirit of excavation but also of imagining lost lives as lives lived
in books—perhaps the quintessence of Woolf’s common reader ideal—the
digitization of the Shakespeare and Company lending library cards generates
manifold possibilities for how we think about the readers through whose
hands Woolf’s novels passed. The data visualizations in this last section of
our article thus offer both a real and imaginary view of readership: real
in that these are facts drawn from historical records; but imaginary in the
sense that no reader at the time would necessarily have had access to the
totality of readers sharing the same books. That view is ours, thanks to
the affordances of both hindsight and digital humanities tools and methods.
These tools help materialize ideas about reading that theorists such as Rita
Felski describe in far more abstract terms: “Perhaps there is a sensed affinity

3 The Prix Femina Vie Heureuse Prize, originally funded by Hachette, was designed to “reward a strong and original piece of work, excellent

in matter and in style, promising for the future, and calculated to reveal to French readers the true spirit and character of England.” To the
Lighthouse was published in French in 1929 alongside Mrs Dalloway, the first full Woolf novels to appear in French. In 1926, a year prior to
the original publication of To the Lighthouse, a translation of the “Times Passes” section appeared in the magazine Commerce. See Finding
Aid, Femina Vie Heureuse Prize.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

with other readers of the same book; one feels oneself to be part of a
virtual community of kindred spirits” (Hooked 26). Or, to put it in terms
more akin to Woolf’s conceptualization of the common reader, the reading
communities our visualizations conjure from the depths of the paper archive
are at once factual and constructed, real and imaginary, biographical and
auto/fictional. Woolf’s common reader embodies these antinomies, coming
“alive” in unfettered navigation of their appositions, both now and in the
past.

Reading To the Lighthouse at Shakespeare and Company
“common readers are often, maybe always, extraordinary
people, and their individuality is what makes the pool of common
readers such a fascinating, complex reflection of a book’s multiple
and plural life.” (Cuddy-Keane, “From Fan-Mail” 16, emphasis
added)
“a book, in order to live, must have the power of changing as
we change.” (Woolf, “Charlotte Brontë” 18)
We have chosen to begin with some case studies of readers of Woolf’s
To the Lighthouse, taking our cue from the anonymous woman on the
refuge, to show just how much we can learn about previously unknown
readers from the lending library records. We do this not because these
readers are exemplary, but because—as, to use Melba Cuddy-Keane’s phrase,
“always extraordinary [emphasis added]” people—they offer an important
metacommentary on the integrative tensions of reading the Project’s
published metadata alongside the idiosyncrasies of reading the messy
materiality of the digital archive itself.
And so, to the narratives. One set of unusually paired cards caught our
eye for their mutual citation of To the Lighthouse: the lending library cards
of a married British couple, Margaret (Kitty) and Gordon Waterfield. They
(the cards and the people) took us down a rabbit hole, where “mute and
inglorious” reading lists suddenly came to refract at once tantalizing and
distressingly commonplace stories about marriage, betrayal, education, class,
and gender (Woolf, Room 45). But they also gave us an intriguing glimpse
into the temporalities and bookish networks and exchanges—the
bibliographic colloquies—of a cultured set of expatriates in 1930s Paris.
How books are shared or recommended to other subscribers within the
Shakespeare and Company Project is speculative, but the procedure becomes
more legible by the chronological orderings within their cards. Additionally,
these paired but discrete cards (a selection shown in fig. 1 and 2) are notable
in the Shakespeare and Company Project corpus because many (but not all)
other couples, married or otherwise related, shared accounts and thus cards.
Couples who shared an account include Frances and Morrill Cody; the
Martin du Gards (but the cards for both of these couples are missing); the

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 1. Margaret (Kitty) Waterfield’s Shakespeare and Company lending library cards. Shakespeare and Company
Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023), https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
members/waterfield-kitty/cards/.

poet and his wife, Archibald and Ada MacLeish (although Ada’s name does
not appear on the cards); and the obscure Misses Somerville, possibly sisters,
living in the now iconic rue de Fleurus, at number 9, in 1922, a two-minute
walk to number 27, home to Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas. Although
the Waterfields may not have been the only married couple to have separate
cards, they may have been the only couple to share a copy of To the Lighthouse
(a parochially speculative idea to be sure, but it raises another question whose
answer is not entirely legible within the Shakespeare and Company metadata:
beyond naming conventions within marriage or known filial partnerships, can
the data by itself, removed from more traditional historical research, tell us
which discrete cards might link other kinds of partnerships or family relations
to one another?).
The Waterfields—Gordon and Margaret (Kitty)—were members of
Shakespeare and Company between 1936 and 1939, with Kitty joining first,
visiting more regularly and staying on later than her husband. While in Paris,
they lived at 41 rue Madame, a short walk from Beach’s shop. Their “his and
hers” reading records, like recto and verso pages or even bookends, recall the
scenes of reading in To the Lighthouse, where, in the last chapter of the first
section, “The Window,” Mr. and Mrs. Ramsay read together, but separately
and differently: she, a Shakespeare sonnet; he, Walter Scott.
Like Mr. Ramsay, Gordon’s interests lie with geopolitical concerns, with Paris
and French politics, and given his profession (he was a journalist in Paris and
Rome, Oxbridge educated, with ties to Bloomsbury on his mother’s side) he
Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 2. Gordon Waterfield’s Shakespeare and Company lending library cards, 1936–1937. Shakespeare and Company
Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023), https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
members/waterfield-gordon/cards/.
4

may have used Beach’s lending library for his book research. While Gordon
checks out nonfiction and periodicals at first, Kitty starts with an eclectic
selection of contemporary work, E. M. Forster’s collection Abinger Harvest
(1936) leading to William Seabrook’s Asylum (1935), a firsthand account
of psychiatric treatment for alcoholism, followed by The Olive Field (1936)
by Richard Bates, an organizer of the International Brigade in the Spanish
Revolution. Kitty takes out Clarence Day’s satirical Life with Father (1935)
before turning to Woolf’s To the Lighthouse in November 1936.
Subsequent books track gendered themes. Kitty weaves more stereotypically
feminine titles and lowbrow genre fiction with experimental modernism, a
move which, interestingly, aligns her tastes with other readers of Woolf: two
of Woolf’s most engaged readers, Alice Killen and Françoise de Marcilly, for
instance, are often reading the same things. Alongside To the Lighthouse,
Kitty borrows dress historian C. Willett Cunnington’s Feminine Attitudes
in the Nineteenth Century (1935) and English poet laureate John Masefield’s
Eggs and Baker (1936) before coming back to Woolf with The Waves (1931)
and subsequently The Years (1937) and Mrs Dalloway (1925), both also
in 1937. A little later in 1937, making her way across a veritable landscape
of women’s issues, Kitty reads Ray Strachey’s Our Freedom and Its Results

4 Gordon Waterfield had a traditionally upper crust Oxbridge education, moving in social circles not far removed from Bloomsbury. He

decided against going into the family cotton business, instead becoming a journalist. He served in World War II, and later became the first
head of Eastern and Arabic services at the BBC. His memoir is titled What Happened to France? (1940).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

(1936), published by the Hogarth Press (its only other reader was the
forgotten actress Agnes Claudius), then, at the other end of the political
spectrum, Anthony M. Ludovici’s “anti-feminist” Woman: A Vindication
(1923), followed by Rebecca West’s The Strange Necessity (1928) and Djuna
Barnes’s Nightwood (1936). Tantalizingly, there are only two events—the
term the Project uses to indicate books either borrowed or bought—attached
to the Ludovici title: Mrs. Waterfield and James Joyce. Kitty had the book for
six days, Joyce for eight years!
In this sense, we might read Kitty’s cards as evidence of an education or
apprenticeship of sorts. Kitty—daughter of Sir Bertram Hornsby, governor
of the National Bank of Egypt, who married Gordon at twenty-one—is
otherwise discoverable in the public records only via her husband, whose
5
published outputs lean heavily on his illustrious female lineage. As a result,
her library cards limn another otherwise unrecorded inner life. The mix of
“genre fiction” reading with “serious” reading provides proof that her thirst
for knowledge was at least partly quenched by access to Shakespeare and
Company.
Unlike the fictional Ramsays, the Waterfields do seem to have traded reading
materials, and a pattern of exchange, signaled by the sharing of To the
Lighthouse, can be traced. Thus, Kitty appears to recommend to her husband
Abinger Harvest, Evelyn Waugh’s memoir Waugh in Abyssinia (1936)—he
checked it out the day she returned it—as well as To the Lighthouse, which he
reads in May 1937 (she had read it about six months earlier). Gordon follows
Woolf with Samuel Richardson’s Pamela (1740) and then George Orwell’s
Keep the Aspidistra Flying (1936). Based on the chronology of his loans,
Gordon likely recommended to Kitty the Danish travel narrative writer Knud
Holmboe’s Desert Encounter (1936). Both liked murder mysteries, including
a number by Dorothy L. Sayers; both checked out a Pinkerton mystery, for
instance, she at the end of January 1937, he on February 1. Perhaps drawn
romantically to its title, Gordon read Warwick Deeping’s bestselling Kitty
(1927).
While the Waterfields’ shared and divergent borrowing habits are captured
on dyadic cards, other less legible, but still recoverable relationships among
subscribers can be gleaned from marginalia on the cards. These holographic
traces constitute, in Deb Verhoeven's sense of the word, the “bridges” that
“reconfigure the sense of, and possibility for, acts of connection and the felt
experience of connectedness” afforded in digital environments (Verhoeven,
“As Luck Would” 9). These bridges are undergirded, we argue, by richly

5 Gordon Waterfield’s family appears to have been full of literary Mrs. Brutons (to cite a character from Mrs Dalloway). His aunt, Janet Ross,

was author of a famous Tuscan cookbook, Leaves from Our Tuscan Kitchen, or, How to Cook Vegetables (1899), actually written by her chef,
Giuseppe Volpe; and Waterfield’s mother, Lina Duff Gordon Waterfield, co-authored a book on Perugia with Margaret (Madge) Symonds,
who was, in fact, Woolf’s aunt. Like Woolf’s mother, Julia Stephen, Duff had been painted by Frederic Watts. Waterfield also wrote a book
about his mother, Lucie Duff Gordon in England, South Africa and Egypt (1937).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 3. Detail from Aline Prot’s first Shakespeare and Company lending library card. Aline Prot’s Lending Library
Cards, Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023),
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/prot-aline/cards/.

textured historical research charged with the “‘voltage’ of relationality”
information architecture affords (12). For instance, scrawled at the top right
hand corner of the second of three lending library cards of Aline Prot,
another To the Lighthouse borrower, the words “Mlle Bernheim / 81 rue de
Lille” appear (fig. 3). Prot, who lived at 83 rue de Lille, was the daughter
of Suzanne Rodrigues-Henriques (daughter of Eugène Rodrigues-Henriques,
alias Erastène Ramiro) and parfumeur Jacques Prot. After her father was
killed in the war in 1914, her mother married Guillaume Lerolle, the head
of the Carnegie Museum; in 1919, she modeled for painter Jacques-Emile
Blanche.
In fact, there were two Bernheims living next door to Prot: the sisters
Françoise and Antoinette, both of whom had their own individual lending
6
library cards. Françoise Bernheim (1912–1943) is a familiar name to those
who know the history of Beach’s shop; she was a Shakespeare and Company
volunteer, “a young Jewish friend” of Beach, who had been excluded from
her studies at the Sorbonne and who was tragically killed in Auschwitz
after being arrested in 1943 (Fitch 214, 402–03). Neither of the Bernheim
sisters borrowed To the Lighthouse. However, Françoise (fig. 4), a member
from 1934–1940, did borrow A Room of One’s Own (1929) in 1936 and
The Common Reader first and second series, both in 1937, alongside lots of
theosophy and Irish literature. Antoinette, who was a member in 1934–1935
and 1938–1942, borrowed Three Guineas (1938) twice in 1938 and 1939,
Jacob’s Room (1922) and Night and Day (1919) in 1939 and Orlando: A
Biography (1928) in 1942. Their different routes through Woolf, seen in their
paired lending cards (fig. 5 and 6) mirror their divergent reading tastes; D.H.
Lawrence is one of just a few authors the sisters shared in common.

6 A “Mrs. Bernheim” was also a member between 1919 and 1931. She does not appear to be related to Françoise and Antoinette.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 4. Françoise Bernheim, permission of Françoise Findlay.

Figure 5. Antoinette Bernheim’s Shakespeare and Company lending library cards, 1934–1935, 1938. Shakespeare and
Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023),
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/bernheim-antoinette/cards/.

More than once, the clerk at Shakespeare and Company links “Mlle
Bernheim” to Prot, specifying in a later mention that it is Antoinette (not
Françoise). It seems that either the two exchanged books directly or that
Beach engaged informal channels of book retrieval. Trace evidence of these

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 6. Françoise Bernheim’s Shakespeare and Company lending library cards, 1934–1936. Shakespeare and
Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023),
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/bernheim-francoise/cards/.

Figure 7. Detail from Aline Prot’s second Shakespeare and Company lending library card. Shakespeare and Company
Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023), https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
members/prot-aline/cards/.

informal, but intimate, bookish relationships appear in the image below: a
clerk notes that one of the Miss Bernheims will “try to get [George Moore’s
Lake] from Mme Prot” whose daughter has left for England (fig. 7).
Our research into the stories radiating from these particular cards has, in fact,
led us from the digital “dust” of the archives to virtual, living conversations
with Antoinette Bernheim’s daughter, who lives today in the UK and is
named for her aunt, Françoise. Among the finds that Françoise shared with
us recently was Antoinette’s very own card catalogue of books read including
cards for To the Lighthouse, on which she noted “symbol of the futility of
wishing something,” A Room of One’s Own (dated 1935) and Mrs Dalloway,
precisely those titles not borrowed from Shakespeare and Company.
Antoinette’s daughter also confirmed that Aline Prot was her mother’s friend
and neighbor, and she has passed on many more stories of crucial friendship

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 8. Cards from Antoinette Bernheim’s personal book catalog (we speculate that ‘N’ is a genre marker for
“novel”).

networks, based on school and neighborhood affiliations, including
membership at Shakespeare and Company, family relocations, and postwar
7
survival.
Sometimes, the hand of the anonymous clerk lifts off the page of the card
altogether, metamorphosing into our hands as researchers, tapping into
online archives, whizzing emails around the globe, finding tendril
connections that expand the margins of these cards to hold associations
written, as it were, in invisible ink and unrecoverable as metadata. For
instance, in searching for Monique de Vigan, another To the Lighthouse
reader, whose presence in the Shakespeare and Company Project lending
cards is distinguished by two “events,” meaning that she both borrowed
and eventually bought To the Lighthouse, we discovered that she too was
connected with Françoise Bernheim. In her published diary, Hélène
Berr—the so-called French Anne Frank—links de Vigan to Françoise in her
capacity as a friend of both women; furthermore, letters from Sylvia Beach
to de Vigan, deposited at the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF), by de
Vigan, doubly confirm their friendship. So, we could, should we so desire,
set Françoise Bernheim’s lending cards alongside de Vigan’s, now that we
know them to have been friends, to ponder (narratively and perhaps later

7 Personal email correspondence, 8 Nov. 2021, with Françoise Findlay, whose mother was Antoinette Bernheim. We were led to Findlay

thanks to the sleuthing of Mélanie Péron: “[Françoise Bernheim and Hélène Berr] were raised a few streets away from each other.
[Bernheim] volunteered at Sylvia Beach’s American bookshop, Shakespeare and Company. She was completely bilingual—raised by an
English governess after the premature death of her mother—and she loved drinking tea at WH Smith’s. [Berr] spent her free time at the
English language bookshop Galignani’s. [Bernheim] studied Sanskrit at the Sorbonne. [Berr] studied English. Both had been refused
admission to the university because they were Jewish.” (Our translation.) See “Hélène Berr | Françoise Bernheim,” Paris sous l’occupation.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

algorithmically) which books they too might have exchanged or shared in
common. De Vigan, who became a translator and a librarian, ultimately in
charge of building the BnF’s Slavic collection (in the 1960s and 1970s), also
had one of the longest lending relationships with Beach’s shop, her fifteen
cards stretching into the late 1940s as she continued to borrow books from
and to correspond with Beach even after the bookshop and lending library
closed, and Beach continued lending from her home.
Reading the cards closely, always attentive to connections the metadata itself
might not initially disclose, but where it might latterly be operationalized
when fugitive connections—like those between Bernheim and de Vigan—are
archivally excavated therefore keeps us alert to where the lending cards hint
at other stories, at other networks, allowing us to understand the complex
structures of the cards themselves, their juxtapositions, and cross-references.
As Dan Edelstein cautions in a review of Jo Guldi and David Armitage’s
The History Manifesto (2014), “Not only must we recognize the limits of
what our data can tell us (in terms of their exhaustivity), but we must also
continue to cultivate the skills of interpretation. Rarely do numbers alone
tell the full story” (246). We, alongside Rebecca Koeser and Zoe LeBlanc in
this cluster on “Missing Data, Speculative Reading,” keep in mind the path
laid out by Daniela Agostinho et al. “away from a techno-capitalism that
identifies missingness as an excuse for compromise and control, and towards
missingness ‘as an engine of creativity and innovation’” (425). The gaps
leave room for generative narratives and reimaginings. So, too, as Catherine
D’Ignazio and Lauren Klein remind us in chapter six of Data Feminism
(2020): “The Numbers Don’t Speak for Themselves” (149–172). That
gesture toward narrative, nonnumeric modes of being and belonging send us
on rich interpretative quests to know more. Which is all to say: the cards
make compelling reading material tout court.

Quantifying Woolf at the Shakespeare and Company Project
What quantitative approaches allow us to do, by contrast, is to generate
in broad numeric strokes a profile of a “standard” common reader and
to create visualizations of reader communities not readily visible—indeed,
potentially invisible—in the paper archive itself. Metadata here serves a crucial
purpose of allowing us to excavate and reanimate networks arising out of
the exchange of books among actual readers; as we explained earlier, this
data analysis embeds a recursive interpretative turn, helping us move from
“real” historical assemblages of book readers to a meditation on the porous
boundaries between fact and imagination, history and story, individual and
community.
And so, to the numbers. According to initial analysis using the number of
borrows as a unit of measurement, the Shakespeare and Company Project
reveals Woolf to be the third most popular author at Beach’s bookshop and
lending library, after Lawrence and Aldous Huxley. She is one of only two
Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

women in the top ten, with Dorothy Richardson at number five. For a
more extended examination of gendered reading habits see “A Counterfactual
Canon” in this collection. Karmanov and Kotin offer analysis of the gender of
authors as well as the gender of readers, demonstrating that when calculated
by number of borrows, Woolf is the most popular female author at the
library. In terms of the top ten titles borrowed at the lending library, Woolf’s
Mrs Dalloway sits at number seven; of books borrowed by women it moves
up two spots to number five, with her later novel The Years a second favorite
8
at number nine (Kotin and Koeser, “Top Ten Lists”). Of the eighteen Woolf
titles held by Beach, Mrs Dalloway was borrowed the most often (thirty-four
times), followed by The Years (twenty seven), with a tie for To The Lighthouse
and Jacob’s Room (twenty four) and A Room of One’s Own (sixteen; see fig. 8).
Woolf had a total of 115 readers at Shakespeare and Company, ninety four
women and twenty one men. On average, women were 4.8 times more likely
to borrow Woolf than men. The borrowing count by gender further clarifies
the data: women checked Woolf’s books out a total of 211 times whereas men
only checked out a total of forty-three times. Interestingly, only about a third
of her readers read her most popular novel, Mrs Dalloway, and only a sixth
read A Room of One’s Own. (Significantly, these were the two works that were
most polarizing in terms of gender; see fig. 9.)
Such data illustrate that actual, localized historical reading practices may
diverge in some small part from scholarly canon formations and more broadbrushed critical assessments, in this instance possibly reflecting the ambiguous
9
reception and late translation of A Room of One’s Own into French. For
an extended consideration of the changing popularity of Shakespeare and
Company titles and authors over time—including Woolf—see “The
Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership” in this
collection (Antoniak et al.). We are also able to trace which Woolf titles a
reader may have bypassed, not always by choice, but owing to vagaries of
membership window, transit through and sometimes out of Paris or France,
and book publication dates. Kew Gardens (1919; two borrows), Reviewing
(1939; one borrow), and The Mark on the Wall (1920; one borrow) were by
far the least popular titles.
The numbers reveal initial readership patterns, allowing us to create and rank
hierarchies of most (Mrs Dalloway) and least (“Reviewing”; “The Mark on
the Wall”) read, but they also recast those readers not so much islanded
alone on traffic refuges but nested within networks and communities. If we
cluster readers around the books, visualized as a relationship linking readers
to their reading material, we gain a better sense of which readers group

8 That Mrs Dalloway was the most read of Woolf’s books at the shop might be because it was the first book to appear in French in 1929

alongside To the Lighthouse.
9 The fact that A Room of One’s Own was not translated into French until the 1950s reflects a resistance in France to this controversial work,

one supported by evidence in folders pertaining to translation rights negotiations at the University of Reading.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 9. Number of times Woolf books were borrowed. Note: the books were not available to readers for the same
amount of time; each was available only from the date of publication to the closure of the lending library. However,
the number of borrows still reveals popularity insofar as the most popular titles—The Years and Mrs Dalloway—were
published relatively late. An interactive version of this figure is available at https://viz.shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
2024/woolf-common-readers/.

with individual books, and which pathways connect one reader to another
(fig. 10). We get a visualization that empirically models Felski’s hypothesis
that “a shared attachment to a book is a shared attachment to others” (“On
Resonance”). In this case, we visualize this community as a bimodal network
with two sets of nodes, Woolf’s books and readers of them, connected by
edges representing the borrowing of the book from Beach’s library. Because
this network connects reader nodes to book nodes, the statistic of most
interest is connectedness. The network shows clearly the community of
Woolf’s readers as they encountered her books through Shakespeare and
Company. If one looks at the data table in our interactive visualization,
one will see that each node’s connections reflect which of Woolf’s readers
were encountering her fiction more widely and which were only reading
one or two books. Sizing the nodes to represent the degree, or number of
connections, reveals the broader engagement with Woolf’s books both in
terms of width and depth. The readers who read the most Woolf through
Shakespeare and Company include common reader Françoise de Marcilly
(ten), scholar Alice M. Killen (nine), sculptor France Emma Raphaël (eight),
10
and prépas professor Fernand Colens (eight) (fig. 12).
In addition, the network map reveals which members of the community
purchased Woolf’s books (green nodes) rather than borrowed them from
the lending library (yellow). Although the vast majority of readers in the
data borrowed the books, some preferred to purchase, including Louise

10 For de Marcilly, see Tilliette (1–5). For Colens, see Robin and Bourdon.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 10. Woolf’s borrowers by gender. An interactive version of this figure is available at
https://viz.shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/2024/woolf-common-readers/.

Olga Bouniols who purchased two books (Night and Day and The Voyage
Out [1915]), Louis Gillet (Flush: A Biography [1933]), Carmen Muñoz
Rocatallada (A Room of One’s Own and Three Guineas), and Elvira de Alvera
(A Room of One’s Own). Only two readers in our dataset both borrowed
and purchased Woolf. Monique de Vigan purchased To the Lighthouse in
addition to borrowing it (as well as the rest of Woolf’s oeuvre) and Maud
Burt purchased The Common Reader despite not borrowing it, preferring to
borrow Flush, Reviewing, and The Years. Graphing the network of readers
reveals the richness of the Shakespeare and Company dataset for
understanding the circulation of books in an immediately visible way.
Engaging interactively with this visualization involves impressionistic pleasure
of being able to see readers gathered around books, like guests at a dinner
party table—a metaphor for reading that Woolf herself uses in one of her
many essays on reading, “Byron and Mr. Briggs,” to conjure the kinds of
bookish conversations that nurture the common reader. As a user “pulls”
on the people nodes, there is the evocative sense that a reader is never not
attached to books and people. Folding in what we might now be able to
discover about their personal biographies, the visualization gives a strong
sense for how “zooming in and out” between biographical detail and
networked or numerical visualizations can be mutually animating. Here a
common reader can be both the protagonist of her own story and part of a
larger collective of common readers.
Another attribute of such an interactive network visualization is that it
equalizes the community of “famous” and “non-famous” readers, drawing
perhaps even more attention to the predominance of unfamiliar names. A
perusal of Woolf’s readers reveals, in fact, that she had few celebrity readers
among Shakespeare and Company members; most were “common readers” in
Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 11. The community of readers (yellow nodes) of Virginia Woolf’s books (blue nodes). The size of the book
node reflects the number of times it was borrowed. An interactive version of this figure is available at
https://viz.shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/2024/woolf-common-readers/.

Woolf’s sense. By naming these readers and indicating their relations through
the books they read, it becomes possible to excavate the rich archival histories
that attend ordinary reading practices. We hope that the graph above will
act as an invitation to our own readers to click through to the additional
resources relating to each reader and/or text available at the Shakespeare and
Company Project to learn more about these individual patrons beyond the
ones whose stories we’ve told in this article: their histories, their reading
habits, their lives.
Turning to the more recognized Shakespeare and Company patrons, James
Joyce, for example, did not borrow any Woolf, although he appears to
have had a copy of The Voyage Out in his library in Trieste, circa 1920
(Ellmann 97–134, 133). American journalist Pauline Pfeiffer, a member
for just six months, according to extant records, borrowed Mrs Dalloway
and The Common Reader in March and April 1926 at the start of her
relationship with future husband Ernest Hemingway (fig. 12). Hemingway
himself, however, did not borrow any Woolf. While Pfeiffer might have been
accompanying Clarissa Dalloway and Septimus Smith from Westminster to
Regents Park, Hemingway was communing with Yeats, Conrad, Huxley, and
Gide, alongside Violet Hunt’s autobiography The Flurried Years (1926), one
of very few women on Hemingway’s borrowing cards. Whether he filched
the Woolf off Pfeiffer’s night-table, we can only guess, but we know from
a sales receipt from Shakespeare and Company, reproduced in Keri Walsh’s
edition of Beach’s letters, that Hemingway did buy copies of Jacob’s Room,
The Voyage Out, To the Lighthouse, and both Common Readers in 1934
Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 12. American journalist Pauline Pfeiffer (pictured with her husband, Ernest Hemingway, in Paris in 1927)
borrowed Mrs Dalloway and the Common Reader. Ernest Hemingway Photograph Collection. John F. Kennedy
Presidential Library and Museum, Boston.

(Beach x). Following Pfeiffer herself on our network graph also shows how
and sometimes why she actually missed other Woolf books; Woolf’s feminist
polemic A Room of One’s Own appeared in print, for instance, only after her
brief membership in 1926 had ended. A quick name-check of other famous
readers: André Maurois, who prefaced the French translation of Woolf’s
Mrs Dalloway (1929); modernist novelist Nathalie Sarraute, who translated
Woolf’s The Waves; Simone de Beauvoir borrowed The Years in 1937, reading
Woolf alongside Elizabeth Bowen and Kay Boyle; and art collector Leo Stein
11
who read multiple Woolf titles, while his sister, Gertrude Stein, did not.
Much more common, however, than celebrity readers were the behind-thescenes “midwives” and middlemen of modernism, those in Sylvia Beach’s
professional and artistic orbit: scholars, translators, students, and educators.
Now that we have access to their names, most are readily identifiable with a
little online (and offline) sleuthing. One attractive feature of the Shakespeare
and Company Project is that it uses linked open data to connect members
with Wikipedia and Virtual International Authority File (VIAF) records;
the majority of names, however, have no Wikipedia or VIAF connections,
inviting us to do the work of excavating these lives and entering them

11 Fitch quotes Beach as saying that “Gertrude’s subscription was merely a friendly gesture. She took little interest, of course, in any but her

own books” (55). If this citation is true, it shows Beach was an inattentive reader of her own lending cards. Despite Stein’s brief membership
between 1920 and 1922, she actually borrowed sixty books to her brother’s 216, a small but provocative example of how received cultural
history can be challenged when oral histories meet digital archives.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

12

into the public record. We are conscious, however, that unless we do the
Sisyphean work of excavating the lives of all the readers in the network
graphs, even those whom we select, drawn perhaps by interesting features of
the lending cards themselves, can only be partial and (riskily, from a statistical
point of view) anecdotal, even if they help us speculate on demographic or
professional trends.
We can partially stress test this paradox by narrowing our scope once again,
looking more closely at quantitative features of To the Lighthouse. Looking
at the names that cluster around To the Lighthouse, we notice that most
readers were obscure, comparable with those whose lives we unearthed above.
Of the twenty-five readers of To the Lighthouse between May 1927 and
1940, eighteen are women, while seven are men, an accurate reflection of
the fact that according to Kotin and Koeser, “Shakespeare and Company
was a community of women” with almost seventy percent of total borrows
13
by women. The majority lived on the Left Bank close to Shakespeare
and Company itself (fig. 13), which aligns with the relative geographical
14
distribution of Woolf’s overall readership (fig. 14). The average loan time for
To the Lighthouse was approximately ten days. Men appear to spend both the
least time and the most time with it (Francisque Gay, Marquis Pagan, Eric
Culley at one, two, and three days; Fanie Eloff is close to the average with
a twelve-day borrow, but Colens, Waterfield, and Anatole Rivoallan clock
in at eighteen, twenty, and twenty-six days, respectively). Borrowing length,
too, represents a tricky interpretive challenge: does a very short borrow
indicate that a reader picked up and began but didn’t like or didn’t finish
a particular book? Or does it, conversely, indicate that they devoured the
book immediately in one enchanted reading session? These aspects of reading
and borrowing history remain tantalizing and mysterious, testament to the
partiality of our own view of past interior experiences. Unless illuminated
by letters, diaries, or other accounts of reading, we cannot know why male
readership has such outliers, temporally-speaking, but we can determine that,
of all To the Lighthouse readers, men were also less likely to read other works
by Woolf than her female readers.
Although obscure, several clusters nonetheless exist in terms of professional
affiliation among readers of To the Lighthouse and their extended
networks—the kinds of affiliations that are only unearthed through gumshoe
academic trekking and with only twenty-five readers, this is a plausible task.

12 The Project allows a user to toggle fluidly between digitized library cards and transcribed metadata which encourages this kind of deep

biographical research, expanding the VIAF corpus. Thus far, only forty percent of members with lending cards have VIAF records. See
Kotin and Koeser, “Cards in Context.”
13 “Women were responsible for nearly 70% of the total borrows—14,422 to 6,096.” See Kotin and Koeser, “Cards in Context.”
14 For a brilliant geographical treatment of the readers around Shakespeare and Company, see McCarthy and de Sá Pereira, “The Literary Right

Bank.” They note the racial, ethnic, class, intellectual, and national aspects of urban geographical positioning and point out that the
“cosmopolitan cultural milieu that sustained the bookshop was particularly vulnerable” in Paris during this fragile pre-war moment.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 13. Location of To the Lighthouse readers.

Figure 14. Locations of all Woolf’s readers.

Putting pressure on Kotin and Koeser’s assessment of the full range of general
readership at the bookshop—“most were not public figures . . . Shakespeare
and Company was not only—or even primarily—a community of writers
and artists,” our targeted excavation of To the Lighthouse readers suggests
that a high proportion appear to have had either some direct or adjacent
public identity as professionals in the fields of arts and literature. We find

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 15. Madeleine Rolland (left, with Yvonne Paquet, right) borrowed five Woolf titles. Fonds Rolland Romain.

three translators (Jeanne Fournier-Pargeoire, Madeleine Rolland, and Jeanne
Mazon; see fig. 15 for a photo of Rolland); a Shakespeare and Company
employee (Eleanor Oldenburger); several teachers/professors/scholars (Killen,
Colens, Rivoallan, Le Coeur); and two artists, both sculptors (Raphaël and
Eloff). In terms of nationalities, of the twenty-five readers, fourteen are
French, four or five American, four or five British, one Dutch/French, and
another South African. We also find a network of younger female readers: in
addition to Prot and de Vigan, Phyllis Price and Oldenburger, both American
(see fig. 16 for a photo of Price). Indeed, very few readers of To the Lighthouse
are “common readers” if we use Jonathan Rose‘s definition of a common
reader (after Richard Altick’s): someone who “read[s] not for professional
reasons, but for pleasure and edification” (1). But they may well be the type
of common reader Woolf had in mind, one for whom reading is both pleasure
and work, but a type of work that is broadly educational, not tied to the
dictates of professors and universities, or even the Johnsonian eminences
of their generation. Unearthing small pieces of these formally unheralded
readers’ lives and reading habits reminds us, ethically, that though removed
from us, they were not obscure to themselves or their intimate circles. For a
significant subset of readers, then, Beach’s Shakespeare and Company was a
vital hub, tied into pedagogical and professional literary communities, which
is perhaps an à propos finding for a novel about the development of the
(female) artist figure.
It is, indeed, tempting to mine more missing biographies on the Shakespeare
and Company Project, imaginatively reenacting how individual readers might
themselves have become connected beyond or via their discrete lending library

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 16. American Phyllis Price (pictured with husband, Anthony Boucher) borrowed To the Lighthouse as a visiting
student in the early 1930s, and returned later in the decade to borrow four Woolf titles, including Orlando twice. Lilly
Library, Indiana University, Bloomington.

cards, formed together in reading communities, and reconjured within the
hustle and bustle, day-to-day business of the bookshop. Like a dance card,
Beach’s records enable us to follow the exchange of a single title from hand
to hand, tracing its path, à la Mrs Dalloway, around and often out of
Paris. From time to time, one sees the same title checked in and out on the
same day. Translator Jeanne Fournier-Pargoire, a member from 1925 to 1931,
for example, borrowed To the Lighthouse on May 23, 1928, the same day
teacher Fernand Colens returned it; she kept it until June 21. Might this be
a recommendation from one friend to another, or strangers crossing paths at
the counter in rue de l’Odéon? A book literally passed from hand to hand,
like the coin of Marguerite Yourcenar’s A Coin in Nine Hands/Denier du rêve
(1934)? Or a book so popular it was on a wait list? Or maybe it signals an
exchange made by Beach or one of her staff members to honor a less formal,
more ad hoc wait list, something suggested by the holographic traces of a
penciled note on Mrs. Waterfield’s card to remember to telephone another
subscriber, Mrs. Kalbfleisch, when Mrs. Waterfield returns Katherine Anne
Porter’s Pale Horse, Pale Rider (1936) (fig. 17). Whatever the circumstances,
the cards testify to the intimacy of the loans as a set of shared exchanges
that constitute as much as they record the making of a reading public,
day by day, year by year. Leveraging digital affordances in using these cards
for computational analysis, data visualizations expand the collective view,
giving these readers “seats” at the tables of literary culture, conversation, and
localized geography, congregating them in space and time.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Figure 17. Detail of Kitty Waterfield’s lending library card with staff instructions to telephone another library
subscriber, Mrs. Kalbfleisch, when Waterfield returns her books.

Epilogue: A Refuge in Lists
So what, in the end, can lists of titles and readers reveal? How might they
record as well as constitute a common reader’s life? Woolf imagined that one
could write one’s autobiography based on a lifetime’s re-readings of one book,
Hamlet: “To write down one’s impressions of Hamlet as one reads it year
after year, would be virtually to record one’s own autobiography, for as we
know more of life, so Shakespeare comments upon what we know” (Woolf,
“Charlotte Brontë” 27). Books and (auto)biographies, lives of books and lives
of people, are intimately connected for Woolf. Reading and re-reading are
also ways of marking time and marking change: as life proceeds, books “have
the power of changing as we change” (27). She wrote, too, in “Hours in a
Library,” an essay where the common reader, now called the “true reader”
possesses “intense curiosity” and is “open minded and communicative” about
the elements of a reading life that can indeed be captured in personal records
and lists of books: “most interesting of all are lists of books that have actually
been read, as the reader testifies with some youthful vanity by a dash of
red ink” (56). While the lending library cards don’t offer readers’ substantive
impressions or interpretations of the texts, they do present chronological
reading lives that flow around and intersect with one another. In so doing,
they offer the researcher various paths radiating outwards from the lists.
Biographical research can lead us to uncover glimpses of connections that
might have stemmed from the kinds of “stupendous argument[s]” with
readerly friends that Woolf conjures from the listed titles, “in which the
Greeks were pitted against the moderns, romance against realism, Racine
against Shakespeare, until the lights were seen to have grown pale in the
dawn” (“Hours” 56).
Given the broader and more communal records that the Shakespeare and
Company Project offers, it is tempting here to think about a collective
biography of To the Lighthouse readers. Like the flowers, maps, and starbursts
of visualized networks, lists and quantities of names can lead in many
different directions for historical research. Each archival library lending card
is a palimpsest of experiences and relationships both documented and
undocumented, documentable and undocumentable. By reading through the

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

layers, we can begin to envision and sometimes precisely identify “a woman
on a refuge,” one out of thousands, crossing a busy street in a distant past,
with a book tucked under her arm.
Submitted: January 08, 2024 EDT, Accepted: February 08, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

works cited
Agostinho, Daniela, et al. “Uncertain Archives: Approaching the Unknowns, Errors and
Vulnerabilities of Big Data through Cultural Theories of the Archive.” Surveillance and Society,
vol. 17, no. 3/4, 2019, pp. 422–41, https://doi.org/10.24908/ss.v17i3/4.12330.
“Antoinette Bernheim’s Lending Library Cards, 1934–1935, 1938.” Shakespeare and Company
Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University, 2023,
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/bernheim-antoinette/cards/.
Antoniak, Maria, et al. “The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership.”
Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116919.
Battershill, Claire. Modernist Lives: Biography and Autobiography and Leonard and Virginia
Woolf’s Hogarth Press. Bloomsbury, 2018.
Beach, Sylvia. The Letters of Sylvia Beach. Edited by Keri Walsh, Columbia UP, 2010,
https://doi.org/10.7312/beac14536.
Berr, Hélène. “Françoise Bernheim.” Paris Sous l’occupation, edited by Mélanie Péron,
https://pennds.org/melanieperon/exhibits/show/parcours/helene-francoise.
---. Journal 1942–44, Suivi de Hélène Berr, Une Vie Confisquée. Editions Tallandier, 2008.
Cuddy-Keane, Melba. “From Fan-Mail to Readers’ Letters: Locating John Farrelly.” Woolf Studies
Annual, vol. 11, 2005, pp. 3–32.
---. Virginia Woolf, the Intellectual, and the Public Sphere. Cambridge UP, 2003, https://doi.org/
10.1017/CBO9780511485060.
Daugherty, Beth. “‘You See You Kind of Belong to Us, and What You Do Matters Enormously’:
Letters from Readers to Virginia Woolf.” Woolf Studies Annual, vol. 12, 2006, pp. 1–212.
D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren F. Klein. Data Feminism. Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Press, 2020.
Edelstein, Dan. “Intellectual History and Digital Humanities.” Modern Intellectual History, vol. 13,
no. 1, 2016, pp. 237–46, https://doi.org/10.1017/S1479244314000833.
Eliot, Simon. “Circulating Libraries in the Victorian Age and After.” The Cambridge History of
Libraries in Britain and Ireland 1850–2000, edited by Alistair Black and Peter Hoare,
Cambridge UP, 2006, pp. 125–46, https://doi.org/10.1017/CHOL9780521780971.013.
Ellmann, Richard. The Consciousness of Joyce. Oxford UP, 1977.
Felski, Rita. Hooked: Art and Attachment. U of Chicago P, 2020, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/
9780226729770.001.0001.
---. “On Resonance.” Talk given to the Contemporary Workshop, Division of Languages, Cultures,
and Literatures, Stanford, University, 21 Jan. 2022, Stanford University.
Femina Vie Hereuse Prize. Finding Aid. Femina Vie Hereuse Prize: English Committee: Minutes and
Papers. Department of Manuscripts and University Archives, Cambridge University Library.
Findlay, Françoise. Personal Email Correspondence with the Authors. 8 Nov. 2021.
Fitch, Noël Riley. Sylvia Beach and the Lost Generation. Norton, 1983.
“Françoise Bernheim’s Lending Library Cards, 1934–1936.” Shakespeare and Company Project,
Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University, 2023,
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/bernheim-francoise/cards/.
“Gordon Waterfield’s Lending Library Cards, 1936–1937.” Shakespeare and Company Project,
Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University, 2023,
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/waterfield-gordon/cards/.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Karmanov, Fedor, and Joshua Kotin. “A Counterfactual Canon.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol.
9, no. 2, May 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116915.
Katz, Peter J. “Redefining the Republic of Letters: The Literary Public and Mudie’s Circulating
Library.” Journal of Victorian Culture, vol. 22, no. 3, 2017, pp. 399–417, https://doi.org/
10.1080/13555502.2017.1306452.
Koeser, Rebecca Sutton, and Zoe LeBlanc. “Missing Data, Speculative Reading.” Journal of
Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116926.
Kotin, Joshua, and Rebecca Sutton Koeser. “Shakespeare and Company: Top Ten Lists.”
Shakespeare and Company Project, 16 Nov. 2020, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
analysis/2020/11/shakespeare-and-company-top-ten-lists/.
---. “The Shakespeare and Company Lending Library Cards in Context.” Shakespeare and Company
Project, 9 Mar. 2020, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/analysis/2020/03/shakespeare-andcompany-lending-library-cards-context/.
Koutsantoni, Katerina. Virginia Woolf’s Common Reader. Routledge, 2009.
“Margaret (Kitty) Waterfield’s Lending Library Cards.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center
for Digital Humanities, Princeton University, 2023, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
members/waterfield-kitty/cards/.
McCarthy, Jesse, and Moacir P. de Sá Pereira. “The Literary Right Bank.” Shakespeare and
Company Project, 5 Apr. 2021, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/analysis/2021/04/literaryright-bank/.
Piper, Andrew. Book Was There: Reading in Electronic Times. U of Chicago P, 2012,
https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226922898.001.0001.
Price, Leah. How to Do Things with Books in Victorian Britain. Princeton UP, 2012, https://doi.org/
10.23943/princeton/9780691114170.001.0001.
Prot, Aline. “Aline Prot’s Lending Library Cards.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for
Digital Humanities, Princeton University, 2023, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
members/prot-aline/cards/.
Robin, Armand, and Alain Bourdon. Armand Robin: Ou, La Passion Du Verbe. Seghers, 1981.
Poètes d’aujourd’hui series.
Rose, Jonathan. “Introduction.” The Edinburgh History of Reading: Common Readers, edited by
Jonathan Rose, Edinburgh UP, 2020, pp. 1–8, https://doi.org/10.1515/9781474461894-003.
Rosenberg, Beth Carole. Samuel Johnson and Virginia Woolf: Common Readers. MacMillan, 1995.
Snaith, Anna. “Wide Circles: The Three Guineas Letters.” Woolf Studies Annual, vol. 6, 2000, pp.
1–12.
Staveley, Alice, et al. “Virginia Woolf in Circulation: The Hogarth Press Order Books, Modernist
Bookselling, and Digital Practice.” Article under review, 2024.
“The New Books at Sylvia Beach’s Famous Bookshop and Lending Library.” New York Herald
Tribune, 18 May 1936.
Tilliette, Xavier. “Claudel et Françoise de Marcilly.” Bulletin de La Société Paul Claudel, no. 163,
2001, pp. 1–5.
Verhoeven, Deb. “As Luck Would Have It: Serendipity and Solace in Digital Research
Infrastructure.” Feminist Media Histories, vol. 2, no. 1, 2016, pp. 17–18, https://doi.org/
10.1525/fmh.2016.2.1.7.
Whelan, Timothy. “‘Room[s] of Her Own’: Libraries and Residences in the Later Career of Mary
Hays, 1814–1828.” Women’s Writing, vol. 29, no. 3, 2022, pp. 402–27, https://doi.org/10.1080/
09699082.2021.1995312.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

Virginia Woolf’s Common Readers in Paris

Wilson, Nicola. “Boots Book-Lovers’ Library and the Novel: The Impact of a Circulating Library
Market on Twentieth-Century Fiction.” Information and Culture: A Journal of History, vol. 49,
no. 4, 2014, pp. 427–49.
Woolf, Leonard, and Virginia Woolf. “Are Too Many Books Written and Published.” PMLA, edited
by Melba Cuddy-Keane, vol. 121, no. 1, 2006, pp. 235–44, https://doi.org/10.1632/
003081206X129846.
Woolf, Virginia. A Room of One’s Own and Three Guineas. Penguin, 1993.
---. “An Introduction to Mrs Dalloway.” The Essays of Virginia Woolf, vol. 4, 1925–1928, edited by
Andrew McNeillie, Harcourt, 1994, pp. 548–50.
---. “Charlotte Brontë.” The Essays of Virginia Woolf, vol. 2, 1912–1918, edited by Andrew
McNeillie, 1987, pp. 26–13.
---. “Hours in a Library.” The Essays of Virginia Woolf, vol. 2, 1912–1918, edited by Andrew
McNeillie, The Hogarth Press, 1987, pp. 55–60.
---. “The Common Reader.” The Essays of Virginia Woolf, vol. 4, 1925–1928, edited by Andrew
McNeillie, Harcourt, 1994, p. 19.
Woolf, Virginia, and Vita Sackville-West. Love Letters: Vita and Virginia. Vintage, 2021.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

