Walsh, Keri. “Sylvia Beach’s Final Book.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May
2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116913.

ARTICLE

Sylvia Beach’s Final Book
Keri Walsh1
1 Fordham University

Keywords: Shakespeare and Company, Sylvia Beach, Bryher, queer theory, modernism, feminism, curation, archives, literary history
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116913

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 2, 2024

After her retirement as a bookseller, Sylvia Beach continued to promote new
books. This article tells the story of one of these books—the last to be recorded
on the Shakespeare and Company lending library cards. In 1962, Beach gave a
copy of Bryher’s memoir, The Heart to Artemis (1962), to Jean-Dominique
Rey, a young French intellectual. The article argues that the gift demonstrates
Beach’s efforts to ensure that the accomplishments of her circle of queer
women would not be lost to history.

Booksellers speak through the books they sell, lend, or promote.
After World War II, Sylvia Beach officially retired from the profession of
bookselling. Having closed the doors of Shakespeare and Company in 1941
under duress during the German Occupation, she never reopened her
bookshop. Entering her sixties in the post-war years, she returned to live
in the apartment above where her bookshop had been. Surrounded by her
enormous archive, she continued to lend, give away, translate, and promote
books and authors. Although she was no longer officially a bookseller, she
continued to speak through books. In what follows, I trace the story of one
of these books, the last one she is known to have shared.
According to Beach’s records made available by the Shakespeare and Company
Project, the last book she gave away was on June 28, 1962, just three months
before her death. The recipient was the French writer and intellectual JeanDominique Rey (1926–2016), and the book was The Heart to Artemis
(1962), the newly released memoir by one of Beach’s closest friends, the
English writer Bryher (1894-1983) (fig. 1). Novelist, arts activist, and life
partner of the American poet H.D., Bryher had been a long-time supporter
of Shakespeare and Company. She was extraordinarily wealthy, the child of a
shipping magnate, and she used her money to support a number of artistic
and political causes. She had been instrumental in keeping Shakespeare and
Company afloat during the lean years of the 1930s: in the autumn of 1935,
for instance, she donated 6500 francs to help the shop’s doors stay open
(Fitch 356).
Beach had been lending Bryher’s books since 1922, when records show that
a copy of Bryher’s first novel, Development (1920), was returned by France
Emma Raphaël. Development was Bryher’s fictionalized account of her own
coddled but claustrophobic upbringing in Victorian and Edwardian England.

Sylvia Beach’s Final Book

Figure 1. Jean-Dominique Rey’s Shakespeare and Company lending library card. Shakespeare and Company Project,
Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023), shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/rey/cards/.

The book included both a damning critique of the English boarding school
system and an autobiographical protagonist who longs to be a sailor and
regrets having been born a girl. Bryher was proud to recall that W. B. Yeats
had found the novel worthwhile: she writes that he “asked me if I had written
Development. . . . He said that he had also felt the educational system to be
wrong and hoped that I was working on another book” (Artemis 230–232).
Beach was a champion of Bryher’s writing. Together with Adrienne Monnier,
she had arranged for Bryher’s Beowulf, the story of a British tea shop during
the Blitz, to be translated into French and published in the Mercure de
France in 1948. The translation appeared even before the English version was
published by Pantheon in 1956. Now, by giving a copy of Bryher’s memoir
to a young French intellectual, she was passing on to the next generation an
account of her circle that affirmed the genius and the contributions of its
women, and especially its queer women.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Sylvia Beach’s Final Book

Sylvia Beach’s careful legacy-building has not gone unnoticed. In The Passion
Projects: Modernist Women, Intimate Archives, Unfinished Lives (2019),
Melanie Micir considers Beach’s writing, exhibitions, and cataloging of Joyce
manuscripts as acts of “curation,” rather than creation, and suggests that such
acts were typical of those she calls “disenfranchised” modernist women like
Beach, Alice B. Toklas, and others (85). To this list of curatorial activities, I
would add Beach’s continued circulation of books, even after she closed her
bookshop and lending library.
Beach’s memoir, Shakespeare and Company (1959), had appeared three years
before Bryher’s The Heart to Artemis, and had provided a charming, sunny
tour through nineteen-twenties Paris. Its cheerful affect rarely wavers. Still,
nestled among the feel-good anecdotes are what Micir identifies as some
“small but insistent notes” about the women who were subtly but surely
being left out of the modernist canon, from Bryher to Gertrude Stein to
Djuna Barnes to Mary Butts (Passion Projects 88). Beach’s memoir includes
these writers alongside Joyce, Hemingway, and the other familiar male
modernists, and pays homage to the woman who had inspired her and been
her life partner, Adrienne Monnier, who founded and operated La Maison
des Amis des Livres, the French bookshop across the street from Shakespeare
and Company. There is a subtle but notable feminism in these inclusions.
Bryher’s memoir, on the other hand, was an avenging work, as its title
invoking Artemis the huntress suggests (fig. 2). Bryher had been outraged by
her depiction in Robert McAlmon’s interwar Paris memoir, Being Geniuses
Together (1938). McAlmon, the American writer who drank away his talent
but somewhat redeemed his reputation as the founder of Contact Editions,
had been Bryher’s husband in the 1920s. At that time, he was running
Contact out of Shakespeare and Company. Funded by Bryher, Contact
had published Hemingway, Stein, Bryher, H.D., and other key modernists.
Although the spitefulness of Being Geniuses Together makes for a juicy read
from an historical distance, the memoir had bruised feelings when it first
appeared. Published after Bryher and McAlmon had divorced, the book
depicts Bryher as neglectful, self-absorbed, and lacking emotional intelligence.
In The Heart to Artemis, Bryher rewrites the story of these years from her
own point of view, giving readers an understanding of how her passionate
love for H.D. shaped her life and helped her defy her parents. She also
argues that McAlmon had agreed to a marriage of convenience, and discusses
her support for the Left Bank’s women of genius and her work helping
refugees escape from Nazi-occupied Europe. The Heart to Artemis contains
an account of Ezra Pound’s unwelcome advances: in a disconcerting scene, he
puts an arm around Bryher and kisses her on the cheek while she “wondered
what in the world I was supposed to do and decided to gaze at him abstractly
and in silence.” Her unresponsiveness puts him off and he awkwardly shifts
to other appetites, asking, “Have you no chocolates?” (Artemis 227).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Sylvia Beach’s Final Book

Figure 2. Bryher’s The Heart to Artemis, photograph by Adrian Harrington Rare Books.

The Heart to Artemis also presents a passionate celebration of Monnier,
which functions as a defense against her characterization in The
Autobiography of William Carlos Williams (1951). Bryher felt deeply
betrayed by Williams, and in defending Monnier, she was also defending her
old friend, Beach. Bryher describes how her expatriate circle had tried to help
Williams get licensed to practice medicine in France, and he had “repaid this
help in his Autobiography by making a number of inaccurate and derogatory
statements about myself and my friends” (258). Feeling protective of Beach,
Bryher objected to Williams's homophobic depiction of Monnier:
Adrienne Monnier, a woman completely unlike Sylvia, very
French, very solid, whose earthy appetites, from what she told
us, made her seem to stand up to her knees in heavy loam,
came in from across the street to make our acquaintance. . .
. She enjoyed the thought, she said, of pigs screaming as they
were being slaughtered, a contempt for the animal—a woman
towards whom it was strange to see the mannishly dressed Sylvia
so violently drawn. Adrienne gave no quarter to any man. Once,
when Bob [Robert McAlmon] in a taxi had taken her in his
arms and kissed her, she had sunk her teeth into his lips so that
he expected to have a piece torn out before she released him.
(Williams 193)
Bryher, in contrast, described Monnier as being “as near a saint as anyone
whom I have known” (Artemis 258). Bryher also reports that her lawyers had
to dissuade her from suing Williams, and that she had come to regret being
dissuaded! She ends the section on Williams by reminding readers of the high
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Sylvia Beach’s Final Book

stakes of their current moment, one in which unreliable anecdotes about the
interwar years were at risk of being inscribed as history: “All the survivors
from the [Latin] Quarter should have joined together to refute his charges in
open court. There is the danger otherwise that future historians of the period
may believe them after we are dead” (258).
Although Beach would likely have celebrated and circulated Bryher’s work no
matter what, the section of The Heart to Artemis that pays tribute to Monnier
gave Beach a particularly compelling reason to pass along the book, especially
to Rey who was proving to be a tastemaker for the next generation. When
Monnier died in 1955, she was the subject of a special issue of the Mercure
de France that celebrated her contributions as bookseller, writer, and cultural
force. Beach and Bryher wanted to do more to secure Monnier’s place in the
literary history of the period. (In 1964, Violette Leduc’s La Bâtarde would
contain another unflattering portrait of Monnier—but Beach did not live to
see it.)
In addition to championing Monnier, Bryher’s narrative also gives the male
modernists shorter shrift than Beach’s memoir. In their place, she provides
readers with effusive appreciations of various literary women of the Left
Bank, including an extended description of a day on which she and
McAlmon ran into Gertrude Stein on a small Paris street, and a vision of
Stein driving “off in her famous Ford, a jolly little dinosaur riding down the
sands of time” (249).
But Bryher saved her greatest affection for Beach and Monnier and their
facing bookshops and lending libraries on the rue de l’Odéon:
There was only one street in Paris for me, the rue de l’Odéon. .
. . It meant naturally Sylvia and Adrienne and the happy hours
that I spent in their libraries. . . . We changed, the city altered,
but after an absence we always found Sylvia waiting for us, her
arms full of new books, and often a writer whom we wanted to
meet, standing beside her in the corner. . . .
Number seven, on the opposite side of the rue de l’Odéon,
was also a cave full of treasures. . . . I see Adrienne coming
towards me as I open the door of number seven, with her arms
full of yellow, paper-covered books. . . . She taught us with a
humility born from great pride, not in her own gifts though
this would have been perfectly legitimate, but because we were
all privileged to put vision above ignorance.
In her own home it is the delicious smells that I remember,
herbs, a chicken roasting, the polish on the wood, these and
the murmur of talk. I met Romains there and Michaux later,
but this belongs to the thirties, Schlumberger, Prévost, and
Chamson. It was a unique experience, first to eat the dinner
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Sylvia Beach’s Final Book

because she cooked better than anyone whom I have ever
known, and then to listen to the conversation of some of the
finest minds in France. . . .
I took Adrienne’s kindness too much for granted and lost the
chance to learn much of what she would willingly have taught
me. She knew me inside out. . . .When the time came she
showed us how to die and hardly a day passes now when I do
not miss her. (246–248)
Rey was an appropriate person to whom to pass along this testimony. He
was a connector of circles, an enthusiast, and a curator, like Beach herself. As
a descendent of the Impressionist painter Henri Rouart, he had a privileged
start in life. Serious childhood illness deepened his appreciation for art and
literature. For a time, he had studied poetry with Paul Valéry at the Collège
de France, an affiliation that aligned him with Monnier’s circle; he had also
been a student of architecture (his father’s profession) at l’École des BeauxArts. He was a sometime-Surrealist (having crossed paths with the group in
the 1940s) and an avid moviegoer who frequented Paris’s post-war ciné-clubs.
After World War II, he became a prominent member of the generation of the
New Wave and the New Novel, and, increasingly, of those moving beyond
existentialism into structuralist and post-structuralist thought. In 1953, he
married the photographer (and beekeeper) Christiane Meurisse and they had
two daughters.
By the time that Beach gave Rey the memoir, he had succeeded in
transforming himself from dilettante to cultural influencer. After a youth
of multiple enthusiasms, toggling between the art world where he was a
pedigreed insider to the literary world where he was a wide-eyed aspirant, Rey,
in his mid-thirties, had found his niche as an editor (fig. 3). At the publishing
house Plon, he had helped shepherd Michel Foucault’s first book, Histoire de
la folie (The History of Madness), into print in 1961. The following year, he
joined Éditions Mazenod as an art editor and befriended the artist and writer
Henri Michaux, whose A Barbarian in Asia (first published as Un barbare
en Asie in 1933) Beach translated in 1949. Michaux’s friendship helped
encourage Rey to follow his interests in Eastern religions and mysticism.
Beach gave Rey a copy of The Heart to Artemis on June 28, 1962, just a
few months before she died in early October in her Paris apartment above
where Shakespeare and Company had once been. Rey would go on to a
thirty-year tenure at Mazenod, producing numerous monographs on art,
novels, and studies of literature. He would go to Argentina to research a
book on Guillermo Roux and meet Jorge Luis Borges. He would publish
articles in George Bataille’s journal Critique, and mingle with Claude LéviStrauss. Rey’s career spanned many decades: later in life he co-founded a
Surrealist journal, Supérieur Inconnu (1995–2001), curated an exhibition on
his ancestor Henri Rouart, and wrote a book about Michaux. As a connector
Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Sylvia Beach’s Final Book

Figure 3. Jean-Dominique Rey, photograph by Christiane Rey, Le Monde.

Figure 4. Bryher, in later years, photograph by Islay Lyons.

of generations, movements, and disciplines, he exerted a kind of influence
that was similar to Beach’s own. Perhaps it was Rey’s potential to carry on
Monnier’s intellectual tradition that most inclined Beach to give him Bryher’s
book.
In their later years, many of the women of modernism saw themselves being
written out of the story, or consigned to background roles. By ending her
career as a distributor of books by sharing a copy of Bryher’s account of
modernist Paris, Beach expressed her desire to be remembered, and for her
circle of queer women to be remembered, as seen through their own eyes (fig.
4).
Submitted: January 08, 2024 EDT, Accepted: February 06, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Sylvia Beach’s Final Book

works cited
Bryher. The Heart to Artemis: A Writer’s Memoirs. Paris Press, 2006.
Fitch, Noël Riley. Sylvia Beach and the Lost Generation. Norton, 1985.
“Jean-Dominique Rey’s Lending Library Cards.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for
Digital Humanities, Princeton University, 2023, http://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
members/rey/cards/.
Micir, Melanie. The Passion Projects: Modernist Women, Intimate Archives, Unfinished Lives.
Princeton UP, 2019, https://doi.org/10.23943/princeton/9780691193113.001.0001.
Williams, William Carlos. The Autobiography of William Carlos Williams. Norton, 1951.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

