Whitmire, Ethelene. “Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library.” Journal of Cultural Analytics,
vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116910.

ARTICLE

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library
Ethelene Whitmire1
1 University of Wisconsin–Madison

Keywords: Shakespeare and Company, Reed Peggram, libraries, biography, privacy, race, queer theory, reading, African American literature, Black studies
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116910

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 2, 2024

Reed Peggram, a queer African American doctoral student in comparative
literature at Harvard University, became a member of the Shakespeare and
Company lending library in 1938, when studying decadence in nineteenthcentury French literature at the Sorbonne. The essay examines the items he
borrowed to provide insights into his life.

In September 1938, Reed Edwin Peggram, a Black American doctoral student
at Harvard, moved to Paris to study decadence in nineteenth-century French
literature at the Sorbonne. Soon after his arrival, he went to Shakespeare
and Company and subscribed to the lending library, joining a long list of
American expatriates in Paris who had made the pilgrimage to the famous
bookshop on the Left Bank. In this article, I analyze the books he borrowed.
Looking at other people’s bookshelves is quite an intimate thing to do.
During the Covid pandemic, celebrities and talking heads appeared on
television and viewers became obsessed with what was on their bookshelves.
Lots of people suspected that the book placement was
performative—designed to lend an air of authority or advertise their own
books. In 2020, The New York Times published a series of articles with
headlines such as: “The ‘Credibility Bookcase’ Is the Quarantine’s Hottest
Accessory,” “What do Famous People’s Bookshelves Reveal?” and “The
Celebrity Bookshelf Detective Is Back.”
Related to this voyeurism are the Unpacking My Library books with images
of bookshelves of famous writers, artists, and architects and a list of their top
ten favorite books. In the foreword of Unpacking My Library: Artists and
Their Books (2017), Jo Steffens states that there is an “underlying assumption
that a private collection could reveal something about the nature of its
owner” (vii). Later, Steffens asks, “Can books serve as a medium through
which to understand more about an artist’s life and work” (xi)? I wondered
if I could understand Peggram—the subject of my biography-in-progress, The
Remarkable Life of Reed Peggram—by analyzing the books he read.
I admit that I felt uncomfortable looking at Peggram’s borrowing history as
a former Librarian-in-Residence at Yale University with a master’s degree in
library service from Rutgers University. I was also a professor in the School of
Library and Information Studies (now the Information School) at my current
institution, the University of Wisconsin–Madison. I taught the reference

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

services course for many years and the American Library Association has a
Code of Ethics that requires professional librarians to respect the privacy of
their patrons. The Code of Ethics #3 states: “We protect each library user’s
right to privacy and confidentiality with respect to information sought or
received and resources consulted, borrowed, acquired or transmitted.” Post-9/
11, librarians began destroying borrowing records so that they could not
be subpoenaed by the government (Starr, “Libraries”). As a result, future
generations won’t know the reading habits of people in a given time and
place.
Specific questions I explore in this article include: How much can we learn
about a person by knowing what that person read? Are the lending library
cards a key to biography, only a partial clue, or worse, a red herring? What
are the connections between Peggram’s reading habits and his identities as a
queer, Black American man?
Other scholars have examined the personal libraries of individuals to gain
insight into their lives. For example, Amanda Golden analyzed the almost
800 books in Anne Sexton’s personal library, arguing that the books “allow
us to revisit her engagement with mid-century literary culture” (66). Golden
suggests that Sexton’s marginalia offer insight into her personality: “Sexton’s
character emerges in her annotations. She captures her laughter in the
margins in ways that she had not yet found a voice for in her poetry”
(68). In “‘Horseshit!’ Yes, Marlon Brando, Eclectic Bibliophile, Wrote in
His Books” (2021), Rebecca Rego Barry dissects Brando’s personal library
of over 3,000 items, categorizing the books by subject: philosophy, religion,
racism—Brando owned many books by James Baldwin—acting, and even
Tahiti. “What Brando’s books ultimately demonstrate,” Barry concludes, “is
the man’s thirst for knowledge and his prolific mind.”
My exploration of Peggram’s lending library selections comes with several
caveats. First, I cannot ask Peggram about his selections. Second, his selections
represent less than one year (1938–1939) in his life that spanned sixty-seven
(1914–1982). Third, Peggram’s selections are limited to the items held by
Shakespeare and Company. Fourth, we all check out books that we never
read. And, finally, I am not analyzing the actual books that Peggram read.
If these books were in Peggram’s private library, he might have underlined
passages, annotated or written notes—maybe he would have folded down
pages to mark his place or inserted ephemera such as tram tickets, opera
tickets, or restaurant receipts. All of these features have been analyzed in
studies of the reading habits of other writers and intellectuals, including
1
Flannery O’Connor and Richard Wright.

1 See, for example, Kinney; Fabre.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

In lieu of having access to Peggram’s personal collection and in the absence of
marginalia and other markings, I devised an alternative method of analyzing
his books. I created a table of the books Peggram checked out. I then looked
up the Library of Congress call numbers and subject headings, and collected
information about each book’s themes, genre, and date of publication, as
well as its author’s race, gender, nationality, and sexuality. I checked out
the books from my university’s library, selecting the same editions whenever
possible. I also analyzed letters Peggram wrote during his time in France to his
mother, grandmother, and friend Dorothy Norman for information about
his movements and activities.
Before analyzing Peggram’s reading habits, I will describe his life before
he went to Paris. Peggram was born in Boston on July 26, 1914 to two
blue-collar workers, Mary and Harvey Peggram. When Peggram was five, his
father returned from World War I mentally disabled and spent the rest of
his life in various mental institutions. Peggram was subsequently raised by
his mother and maternal grandmother Laura Reed who became his primary
caretaker after his mother remarried and moved to New Jersey and had two
more sons. Reed, a cleaning woman, pushed her first-born grandchild to
pursue higher education and Peggram attended Boston Public Latin School
and graduated in 1931. As a member of Harvard University’s Class of
1935, Peggram completed a thesis for honors in French literature titled, “A
Comparison of the Personal Element in Madame Bovary and L’Éducation
Sentimentale.” Madame Bovary (1856) probably appealed to Peggram who
also dreamed of a more exciting life than the one he was born into. In 1936,
Peggram received a master’s degree from Harvard in comparative literature.
That fall, he reluctantly enrolled in Columbia’s doctoral program in English
and Comparative Literature. Nothing compared to Harvard! Trying to make
the best of it, he threw himself into extracurricular activities, writing essays
and book reviews for the student magazine, Chimère, a French publication.
The following year, he was accepted into Harvard’s doctoral program in
comparative literature. During the 1937–1938 academic year, he received
a John Harvard Fellowship and a Rosenwald Fellowship to study at the
Sorbonne.
Peggram was one of many Black Americans who became expatriates in
Paris. There was something magical about Paris—the city’s reputation for
racial equality acted as a charm that drew Black Americans. But if Peggram
anticipated a lack of racial stereotypes, he did not mention it in his letters.
The one nod to his race was his surprise at the ease of booking a hotel room,
his first, as a Black American in New York City before he set sail.
In August 1938, Peggram took the S. S. Veendam from the Holland–America
Line to Europe from Hoboken, New Jersey. He was thrilled to finally
go to France after years of studying the language, listening to Debussy,
and reading Flaubert. At last, he had the opportunity to test his language

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

skills—when he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, a professor said he spoke
like a native speaker. This was his first trip abroad. The transatlantic crossing
took about ten days. He disembarked in Boulogne, France and made his
way to Paris. Peggram checked into the first of a series of hotels on the
Left Bank. He did not stay in the Montmartre section of Paris, where many
Black American expatriates resided, and makes no mention of attending jazz
clubs—the legendary Chez Bricktop, managed by Ada “Bricktop” Smith, was
still operating when Peggram arrived in Paris. In fact, he would later laugh
that his Danish friends in Copenhagen were surprised at his lack of interest
in jazz. His first residence was at the Hôtel de Seine, located at 52 rue de
Seine in the sixth arrondissement in Saint-Germain-des-Prés. As he noted in
a postcard to his grandmother, the hotel was not, despite the name, on the
Seine. After dropping off his steamer trunks, he left for a week-long trip to
London.
Peggram had arrived in Paris during a tumultuous time. Europe was on the
brink of World War II and most foreigners were leaving. As Tyler Stovall
notes in Paris Noir (1996), “Virtually all of these exiles finally did leave Paris
at the beginning of World War II, as the possibility of a German invasion
became daily more menacing. Yet a very few, most notably Josephine Baker,
chose to stay with the people of France” (84). The United States State
Department strongly encouraged Americans to leave Europe. But Peggram
was determined to remain as long as he could; after all, he had been waiting
for this opportunity to study and live abroad for years.
Upon his return to Paris, he received permission to use the Bibliothèque
nationale de France for his academic reading (fig. 1). He then addressed the
problem of his leisure reading by becoming a member of the lending library
at Shakespeare and Company.
Peggram borrowed twenty-two books and magazines during his year in Paris.
An analysis of his lending card reveals that he signed up in September 1938
for a six-month membership with which he could borrow one item at a time
for the student rate of seventy francs with a fifty francs deposit (fig. 2). He
checked out his first book on September 26. This book was an anomaly since
it was not a novel but the biography of Hart Crane, a queer poet who died
by suicide in 1932. Peggram originally noted he was residing at the Hotel de
Seine but later added that he moved to the Hotel des Deux Continents at 25
rue Jacob.
I originally planned to read all the items he borrowed but quickly realized that
was an untenable proposition given the timeline for this cluster of articles.
But I did read two books by Christopher Isherwood—Mr Norris Changes
Trains (1935) and Sally Bowles (1937)—the first two works of fiction that
Peggram checked out. A review of his lending card reveals that he checked
out Mr Norris Changes Trains on October 10, and returned it the next day.
An indication that he read it and liked it is the fact that he checked out
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

Figure 1. Reed Peggram’s membership card for Bibliothèque nationale de France.

a second book by Isherwood that day, October 11, returning it the next
day. He devoured the books. Peggram likely enjoyed the sense of adventure
experienced by the young narrator who encountered a mysterious Mr. Norris
and an equally mysterious Sally Bowles during his adventures in Berlin.
Some patterns emerge upon the examination of Peggram’s borrowing
practices. The majority of the books were in the Library of Congress call
number category of “P” for language and literature. A rare exception was
Journey to a War (1939) by W. H. Auden and Christopher Isherwood, a
travel narrative set in China. Most of the books were classified as English
literature followed by American literature. Outliers include a French novel,
Marcel Proust’s The Guermantes Way (1920, translation 1925), and plays
strangely classified as German by August Strindberg, a Swede. The settings
of the books are England, the United States, Germany, and in one instance
Tahiti—in Somerset Maugham’s The Moon and the Sixpence (1919)—and
the Black Sea region, Sparta, and Greece in Naomi Mitchison’s The Corn
King and the Spring Queen (1931), the only publication by a woman. Topics
of the novels include adultery, prisoners of war during World War I, and a
fictionalized account of the life of Paul Gauguin. But a common focus was a
man on an adventure—a topic that encompasses the campus novels, Of Time
and the River: A Legend of Man’s Hunger in His Youth (1935) by Thomas
Wolfe and Starting Point (1937) by C. Day Lewis. Peggram also checked out
two short story collections, Stories of Three Decades (1936) by Thomas Mann
and The Gay and Melancholy Flux (1937) by William Saroyan; a magazine,
New Writing; and a poetry collection, The Still Centre (1939) by Stephen
Spender. Besides the three volumes of Strindberg plays, Peggram borrowed

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

Figure 2. Reed Peggram’s Shakespeare and Company lending library cards. Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023),
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/peggram/cards/.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

one other play, On the Frontier: A Melodrama in Three Acts (1938) by two
of his favorite authors, Auden and Isherwood. Charles Morgan was the only
other author that Peggram checked out more than once, borrowing The
Fountain (1932) in March 1939 and Sparkenbroke (1936) in May 1939.
The preponderance of the authors were British, then American, and two who
became citizens of both countries: Auden and Isherwood. The remaining
authors include one from Sweden (Strindberg); one from Ireland (Day
Lewis); one from France (Proust); one from Scotland (Mitchison); and one
from Germany (Thomas Mann).
Sexuality was the most difficult category to analyze. I used the Oxford
Dictionary of National Biography and American National Biography to
examine biographies of authors. Many of the writers never officially declared
their sexual orientation and had relationships with both men and women.
Many are now known to have been queer or bisexual. Did Peggram know
the sexual orientation of authors? Or was he simply drawn to stories about
the adventures of other men? Or did Shakespeare and Company happen to
have a significant number of books by queer writers because the owner, Sylvia
Beach, was a lesbian? Thomas Mann’s biographical entry reads, “Mann’s
sexual identity has been the subject of much speculation. Although married
and the father of six children, Mann was preoccupied with homoeroticism”
(Frisch). Auden and Isherwood had a relationship during their long
friendship. Stephen Spender, although married, had affairs with men,
including Auden. And Hart Crane, the subject of the first book that Peggram
borrowed, was queer. Why was Peggram drawn to their writing? None of
the publications had overtly queer storylines but, perhaps, they contained
subtexts that attracted Peggram.
Peggram was primarily interested in reading the latest books. Most of the
items he borrowed were published in the 1930s.
Peggram could have borrowed books by Black American authors, but did
not. In her contribution to this cluster, Caitlin O’Keefe describes how Black
lending library members such as Aimé Césaire and Gwendolyn Bennett
borrowed books by Black American authors. On March 17, 1937, Beach
wrote a letter to the Friendship Press stating, “The French Negro students in
Paris rely on my lending library to keep them in touch, as much as possible,
with American Negro Literature” (Beach, Letters 178). Beach requested
specific titles and the latest issues of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) journal The Crisis and the
National Urban League’s Opportunity.
Bennett arrived in Paris thirteen years before Peggram during the heyday of
Shakespeare and Company. She was associated with the Harlem Renaissance
as both an illustrator and writer. When she received a scholarship to study
in Paris in 1924, she was teaching fine arts at Howard University, a Black

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

institution. In 1925, during her time in Paris, she wrote to Harlem
Renaissance writers Countee Cullen and Langston Hughes about her
experiences and often mentioned Beach and Shakespeare and Company. She
kept abreast of what was happening in Harlem’s literary circles and submitted
her own work to an Opportunity contest. In a letter to Hughes, she writes:
“I begin to meet some new people and know some new things. Chief among
them Sylvia Beach… You know ‘Shakespeare and Co.’ in the Rue de l’Odeon,
don’t you? If not, the next time you are here you must go there tout de suite”
(Bennett 198–199). Bennett met James Joyce and Ernest Hemingway at tea
in Beach’s home. Beach also invited her for Thanksgiving. In another letter
to Hughes, she asks him to send a copy of his book The Weary Blues (1926)
and remarked that Cullen already sent her a copy of his most recent unnamed
work—most likely Color (1925) (Bennett 204). So even with the bookshop
and lending library in Paris she still craved immediate engagement with books
published back home.
The lending library held a range of books by Black American authors:
W. E. B. Du Bois’s Darkwater: Voices from Within the Veil (1920); Jean
Toomer’s Cane (1923); Jessie Fauset’s Comedy, American Style (1933); Zora
Neale Hurston’s Jonah’s Gourd Vine (1934) and Mules and Men (1935);
among others. Although Peggram did not check out Hughes’s work, he
was aware of the poet. Rudolph Dunbar, the London correspondent for
the Associated Negro Press, had a column, “European Comments,” in the
New York Amsterdam News. In the column, he lamented that he was not in
town in September 1938 “to be of service” to Peggram and another Black
American on his way to London: Hughes. Dunbar mused, “If they make the
right contacts,” Peggram and Hughes “will serve a useful purpose in breaking
down some of the prejudice against our race” (B7). Peggram’s white friend
Newton Arnold sent him a clipping of the column from the Kansas City
Black newspaper The Call. Peggram crowed to his grandmother, “You see that
your little brown boy is becoming quite famous, getting mentioned beside
Langston Hughes” (Letter to Reed).
A review of Peggram’s life revealed he had very little contact with Black
Americans outside of his own family. He attended predominantly white
educational institutions. His lack of interest in stories about and by Black
Americans may have reflected his educational upbringing, which most likely
did not include studying Black authors.
His studies at the Sorbonne did not start until around mid-November 1938.
Peggram had time to get familiar with Paris, to read, to go to museums,
the symphony and the opera, and to travel around Europe. Besides England,
Peggram went to Belgium, Poland, and Germany. He had hardly seen the
United States. He had only been in Massachusetts, New York, New Jersey,
Connecticut, and New Hampshire. Peggram did not say which city or cities
he visited in Germany, only that he fared better than his friend Newton who

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

was beaten when he did not show the proper respect to the Nazis. In Poland,
he saw his friend Toni, whom he referred to as the Count. It is unknown how
they met but Peggram seemed quite adept at making interesting friends—like
the narrator in Isherwood’s fiction. The Count was Antoni Sobański, a queer
writer, who was part of Poland’s bohemian, artistic community. His parents
really were a count and countess, and Toni lived luxuriously in a palace.
Peggram checked out New Writing, a hybrid literary monthly book-magazine
edited by John Lehmann, on October 25. Peggram looked at the other literary
journals available and suggested to Beach that she order a specific journal.
He was self-interested. While Peggram was a doctoral student at Harvard, he
began corresponding with Dorothy Norman about a new journal she began
editing and publishing in 1938, Twice a Year: A Book of Literature, The Arts,
and Civil Liberties. Norman was a writer, photographer, and supporter of
Planned Parenthood, the National Urban League, and the American Civil
Liberties Union. Peggram wanted to publish an article he wrote about André
Gide. In a letter to Norman, he writes, “Incidentally, I have spoken to the
ladies of Shakespeare and Company (12, rue de l’Odéon, Paris VIe), and it
has been suggested by them that they would be glad to receive a sample
copy of TWICE A YEAR, which, upon examination, they would probably
consider for their bookstore” (Letter, 19 Mar. 1939). Later, Peggram reported
to Norman that he saw issues of Twice a Year in the bookshop (Letter,
23 June 1939). Peggram would have been thrilled to see the issue with his
contribution for sale at Shakespeare and Company. Unfortunately, Twice a
Year did not publish “André Gide—Novelist” until after Peggram relocated
to Florence, Italy the following year. It appeared in a double issue in 1941
after an article by Henry Miller.
Peggram wanted to be part of a literary group like Auden and Isherwood. In
Denmark, after World War II began, he wrote to his mother about his goal of
making a living as a writer: “Well, Mother, I must say, my trip to Europe has
been one of the most unusual. If I ever get out of all this alive, I won’t have
to write novels. I can simply write books about myself and my adventures”
(Letter to Farrar). Perhaps he was considering writing something similar to
Journey to a War. Ultimately, Peggram was more comfortable as a scholar:
he published two academic articles while in Europe, both in The Modern
Language Review (Peggram, “Utopia”; “Amphitryon”).
At the end of November 1938, Peggram briefly moved to the Hotel SaintAndré-des-Arts at 66 rue Saint-André-des-Arts, a bohemian hotel populated
by artists, singers, and actors. Importantly, the hotel did not have a 10pm
curfew for visitors—something that vexed Peggram about his last hotel. He
did not note this change of address on his lending card at Shakespeare
and Company. At this hotel, he entertained Thomas Handforth, a queer
American artist and children’s book illustrator who was awarded a
Guggenheim in 1933. Handforth captured an image of Peggram in Conté

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

Figure 3. Portrait of Reed Peggram by Thomas Handforth, courtesy of the Tacoma Public Library.

crayon (fig. 3). Peggram met Handforth through his friends Count Toni
and Jan Gay from New York. Gay was a pseudonym for Helen Reitman,
a children’s book author who studied homosexuality, establishing the
Committee for the Study of Sex Variants in 1935.
That same month, November 1938, Peggram checked out Of Time and
River about a Harvard graduate from a small town in North Carolina who
moved to New York City and ended up traveling overseas—elements of
Peggram’s own life story. It’s a mammoth novel. The edition that Peggram
borrowed clocks in at 912 pages! Not surprisingly, he doesn’t check out
another book for almost an entire month. His next borrow is a collection of
short stories—The Gay and Melancholy Flux. School had started and he did
not have time to read another massive novel.
Peggram relocated to the Hotel des Deux Continents where he remained for
the rest of the academic year and the summer (fig. 4). He paid 330 francs or
$10 a month for his room, which was on the fourth floor overlooking the
street with two large windows as big as doors that opened in two halves across
the middle. It was ideal for reading. Perhaps he created a little reading nook.
The room contained three chairs including a large armchair. At first, he piled
his books on the mantlepiece above a beautiful, fake fireplace. But one day
when he returned to his room, he discovered that the two female proprietors
had given him bookcases.
In January 1939, Peggram planned to translate poetry and publish an article
in a French magazine with his friend Claude, identified as a Baroness’ son,
about Spender. Peggram met the poet when he was in London. Peggram
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

Figure 4. Map of Reed Peggram’s addresses in Paris.

claimed he introduced the French to Spender—perhaps he meant the Frenchspeaking public. In May 1937, Spender had participated in a reading at
Shakespeare and Company. As Sylvia Beach recalls, “Ernest Hemingway for
once made an exception to his rule against reading in public and consented
to appear if Stephen Spender could be persuaded to join him. So we had
a double reading, and a great sensation it made!” (Beach, Shakespeare and
Company 211).
That January, Peggram borrowed Phoenix: The Posthumous Papers of D.
H. Lawrence (1936). The New York Times described it as an 852–page
book divided into seven sections, including reviews, short essays, and long
essays on a variety of topics and places including flowers, women’s suffrage,
Thomas Hardy, and Florence. The reviewer called Phoenix “an appealing and
a provocative book, disappointing and disturbing, exciting and exhausting”
(Jack BR29). Later in January, Peggram borrowed The Guermantes Way.
Peggram returned his copy of The Fountain by Charles Morgan and renewed
his Shakespeare and Company subscription on March 27, 1939. He checked
out several more items before ending his membership; he returned the last
item he borrowed from the lending library—a volume of Strindberg
plays—on July 29.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

In mid-August 1939, Peggram and his boyfriend Gerdh Hauptmann, a
Danish student at the Sorbonne, went on vacation to Copenhagen. World
War II began approximately two weeks later. They remained in Denmark
for seven months before briefly returning to Paris in March 1940 to retrieve
their belongings and make their way to Italy. A few weeks after they left
Copenhagen, Denmark was invaded and occupied by the Nazis. Once in
Italy, Hauptmann was denied passage to the United States. They remained
in Florence for several years before they were captured and placed in a series
of detention camps in Northern Italy. Eventually Peggram escaped, returning
to the United States in 1945. His life in the US took a downward trajectory.
He spent the next four years in a mental institution before returning to the
care of his mother. Unable to work, he sang in a choir at his local church and
frequented the main branch of the Boston Public Library where he primarily
checked out classical music albums. Peggram died on April 20, 1982.
The purpose of this article was to analyze the leisure reading of Reed Edwin
Peggram. I wondered if a biographer could learn anything about a subject
by examining the books they read. Peggram’s reading list was consistent
with his queer identity. It is not clear how or if he knew that the authors
were queer but perhaps there were signals or coded language within the
descriptions of the books. Maybe, his network of queer friends exchanged
reading recommendations. Peggram’s reading list confirmed one aspect of
his biography—his estrangement from his cultural background as a Black
American. None of the books that Peggram borrowed were by a Black
American author.
Peggram traveled around Europe but ended up dying in the city where he was
born. But, for less than a year, he realized his dream to live in Paris, becoming
part of the literary community at Shakespeare and Company.
Submitted: January 03, 2024 EDT, Accepted: February 05, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

works cited
Barry, Rebecca Rego. “‘Horseshit!’ Yes, Marlon Brando, Eclectic Bibliophile, Wrote in His Books.”
Literary Hub, 7 June 2021, https://lithub.com/horseshit-yes-marlon-brando-eclectic-bibliophilewrote-in-his-books/.
Beach, Sylvia. Shakespeare and Company. Harcourt, 1959.
---. “To the Friendship Press.” 17 March 1937. The Letters of Sylvia Beach, edited by Keri Walsh,
Columbia UP, 2010, pp. 178–79, https://doi.org/10.7312/beac14536.
Bennett, Gwendolyn. “To Langston Hughes.” 1926. Heroine of the Harlem Renaissance and
Beyond: Gwendolyn Bennett’s Selected Writings, edited by Belinda Wheeler and Louis J.
Parascandola, Pennsylvania State UP, 2018, pp. 203–04.
---. “To Langston Hughes.” 2 Dec. 1925. Heroine of the Harlem Renaissance and Beyond:
Gwendolyn Bennett’s Selected Writings, edited by Belinda Wheeler and Louis J. Parascandola,
Pennsylvania State UP, 2017, pp. 198–99.
“Code of Ethics.” American Library Association, https://www.ala.org/tools/ethics.
Dunbar, Rudolph. “European Comments.” New York Amsterdam News, 10 Sept. 1938.
Fabre, Michel. Richard Wright: Books and Writers. UP of Mississippi, 1990.
Frisch, Shelley. “Mann, Thomas (1875–1955), Writer.” American National Biography, 2000,
https://www.anb.org/display/10.1093/anb/9780198606697.001.0001/
anb-9780198606697-e-1601051.
Golden, Amanda. “Anne Sexton’s Modern Library.” Collecting, Curating, and Researching Writers’
Libraries: A Handbook, edited by Richard W. Oram and Joseph Nicholson, Rowman &
Littlefield, 2014, pp. 65–75.
Jack, Peter Monro. “Papers D. H. Lawrence Wrote.” The New York Times, 29 Nov. 1936.
Kinney, Arthur F. Flannery O’Connor’s Library: Resources of Being. U of Georgia P, 1985.
O’Keefe, Caitlin. “Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company.” Journal of Cultural
Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.117123.
Peggram, Reed Edwin. “A Neglected Dutch ‘Amphitryon’ of 1679.” Modern Language Review, vol.
36, no. 1, 1941, pp. 112–15, https://doi.org/10.2307/3717268.
---. “The First French and English Translations of Sir Thomas More’s ‘Utopia.’” Modern Language
Review, vol. 35, no. 3, 1940, pp. 330–40, https://doi.org/10.2307/3716629.
---. Letter to Dorothy Norman. 19 Mar. 1939. Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke
Rare Book and Manuscript Library, MSS 792, box 77, folder Peggram, Reed Edward 1938–1941,
nd.
---. Letter to Dorothy Norman. 23 June 1939. Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke
Rare Book and Manuscript Library, MSS 792, box 77, folder Peggram, Reed Edward 1938–1941,
nd.
---. Letter to Laura Reed. 3 Oct. 1938, private collection.
---. Letter to Mary Farrar. 4 Sept. 1939, private collection.
“Reed Peggram’s Lending Library Cards.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital
Humanities, Princeton University, 2023, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/
peggram/cards/.
Starr, Joan. “Libraries and National Security: An Historical Review.” First Monday, vol. 9, no. 12,
2004, https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v9i12.1198.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Unpacking Reed Peggram’s Library

Steffens, Jo, and Matthias Neumann, editors. Unpacking My Library: Artists and Their Books. Yale
UP, 2017.
Stovall, Tyler Edward. Paris Noir: African Americans in the City of Light. Houghton, 1996.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

