Koeser, Rebecca Sutton, and Zoe LeBlanc. “Missing Data, Speculative Reading.” Journal
of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116926.

ARTICLE

Missing Data, Speculative Reading
Rebecca Sutton Koeser1, Zoe LeBlanc2
1 Princeton University, 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Keywords: readers and reading, libraries, missing data, forecasting, recommendation systems, speculative reading, Shakespeare and Company, Ernest
Hemingway, modernism, Sylvia Beach
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116926

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 2, 2024

In this article we use an approach we term “speculative reading” to explore gaps
in Sylvia Beach’s lending library records and the Shakespeare and Company
Project datasets. We recast the problem of missing data as an opportunity and
use a combination of time series forecasting, evolutionary models, and
recommendation systems to estimate the extent of missing information and
speculatively fill in some gaps. We conclude that the datasets include ninetythree percent of membership activity, ninety-six percent of members, and sixtyfour percent to seventy-six percent of the books despite only including twentysix percent of the borrowing activity. We then treat Ernest Hemingway as a test
case for speculative reading: based on Hemingway’s known borrowing and all
documented borrowing activity, we generate a list of books he might have
borrowed during the years his borrowing is not documented; we then verify
and interpret our list against the substantial scholarly record of the books he
read and owned.

Sylvia Beach’s Shakespeare and Company, once a hub for the Lost
Generation, has become iconic in popular culture. The continued cultural
prominence of the bookshop and lending library is no accident. Beach
knew that publishing James Joyce’s Ulysses (1922) would make Shakespeare
and Company famous. Her memoir, published in 1959, is an exercise in
name-dropping. She celebrates her relationships with writers, from Joyce
to Gertrude Stein, and from Ernest Hemingway to Richard Wright. And
subsequent memoirs from lending library members, as well as the voluminous
scholarship on this era, has only reinforced the cultural significance of
Shakespeare and Company. But for all this fame and scholarly attention,
much about the bookshop and lending library remained unknown—until
recently. With the release of the Shakespeare and Company Project (hereafter
the Project), questions that had been difficult to answer have now become
almost trivial due to the scale and quality of the data. But with this new
computational potential to study Shakespeare and Company, new challenges
have arisen. Beach was far from a perfect record keeper, and her records have
not been perfectly preserved, even for some of her most famous patrons.
Hemingway, for example, joined the lending library in 1921, but records of
his borrowing history do not begin until 1925. So, while the release of the
Project provides an unprecedented window into Shakespeare and Company

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

and its community of patrons and mentors, it does so unevenly. As a result,
the Project provides an opportunity to explore a phenomena that is endemic
to humanistic scholarship, if not all knowledge production: missing data.
There are always boundaries and gaps in the evidence we use for cultural
analysis, whether due to the original limitations in our source materials, or
due to larger structural forces that, whether intentionally or not, determine
what gets preserved as cultural heritage. But this new era of large-scale
datasets, though perhaps providing more comprehensive and accessible
information, also can counter-intuitively elide what is missing through sheer
scale. This dynamic is at the heart of Mimi Onuoha’s The Library of Missing
Datasets, which asks us to consider what and why data may be missing or
unknown. Itza A. Carbajal and Michelle Caswell’s work also argues that
scholars need to engage archival theory around digital archives because
“archival silences are magnified in digitization projects.” “[W]hat users see
in an ostensibly finalized digital repository,” they write, “represents many
layers of appraisal decisions, many records that did not make the digitization
cut, and, subsequently, an exponential multitude of silences” (1108). The
Shakespeare and Company Project by-and-large heeds these injunctions. In
the article “Shakespeare and Company Project Datasets,” Joshua Kotin and
Rebecca Sutton Koeser provide an overview of the Project’s missing data, as
well as how Beach and her assistants shaped what remains of the Shakespeare
and Company archive. “[R]esearchers,” they advise, “should keep in mind
that the sources reflect the work of a small and overwhelmed lending library
staff, keeping records to facilitate the day-to-day operation of a business,
not the work of future literary historians and data scientists” (11). Yet even
with this transparency, missing data remains a reality for scholars seeking to
understand the Shakespeare and Company lending library and actually use
Project data. Although Kotin and Koeser’s advice is essential for researchers,
we agree with Miriam Posner’s assessment: “if you can analyze something
computationally … it’s going to be really hard to tell people that they
shouldn’t.”
In this article, we consider the extent of “missingness” in the Project to offer
researchers preliminary estimates of how it might influence their analyses, and
to explore methods for computationally modeling missing data. Some of the
methods we use, such as forecasting and recommendation systems, are wellestablished outside the humanities for grappling with and imputing missing
1
data, but have yet to be utilized extensively in digital humanities. We also
propose an alternative approach to studying the Shakespeare and Company
lending library, one that is both familiar and foreign to humanists and
digital humanists—an approach we term “speculative reading.” In contrast to
“distant reading,” “speculative reading” describes a way of modeling missing

1 Other approaches not used in this article that have been tested to some extent in the humanities include bootstrapping and sampling.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

data, while remaining open to new ways of imagining and theorizing the
archive—in this case, the communities that shaped Shakespeare and
Company.
Speculation has long been a staple of how humanists explore the
past—especially those working with incomplete materials. As Saidiya
Hartman describes in Wayward Lives (2019), “I have pressed at the limits
of the case file and the document, speculated about what might have been,
imagined the things whispered in dark bedrooms, and amplified moments of
withholding, escape and possibility, moments when the vision and dreams
of the wayward seemed possible” (xiv–xv). Such an approach might seem
antithetical to computational research; after all data is inherently an
abstraction that often sacrifices specificity for aggregation. But as Johanna
Drucker and Bethany Nowviskie argue, “speculative approaches make it
possible for subjective interpretation to have a role in shaping the processes,
not just the structures, of digital humanities. When this occurs, outcomes
go beyond descriptive, generative, or predictive approaches to become
speculative. New knowledge can be created” (442). Our approach is also
inspired by Ryan Cordell’s recent call for “speculative bibliography as a
complementary, experimental approach to the digitized archive, in which
textual associations are constituted propositionally, iteratively, and
(sometimes) temporarily, as the result of probabilistic computational models”
(521–522). We see “speculative reading” as building on these frameworks,
as well as from debates over close, middle, and distant reading in digital
humanities. But our emphasis on the speculative goes even further.
We demonstrate how speculative reading as a framework can help us consider
not only the scale of what is missing but also illuminate individual records.
Barring the discovery of a previously unknown cache of archival materials,
computational and statistical methods present an exciting but under-utilized
avenue for investigating, estimating, and extrapolating on the missing
2
information in this archive. We present a case study that focuses on
Hemingway, who first joined the lending library in 1921 but, as we have
noted, has incomplete borrowing records even though he is one of the more
famous members of the library. While scholars have attempted to identify
his reading habits from his letters and other archival sources, we demonstrate
how predictive methods, which are generally intended to forecast future
interactions, can be repurposed to predict the past. Rather than producing
definitive answers, these methods are best understood as a form of speculative
reading, where models provide a means to experiment in knowledge creation.
Similar to the Uncertain Archives research project, we aim to “carve out an

2 This is not out of the realm of possibility, given Joshua Kotin’s propensity to discover new sources to augment the Project; but finding a

major source, such as a presumed non-extant logbook or substantial cache of lending library cards, seems unlikely at this point.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

epistemic space for modes of inquiry that are motivated less by providing
answers than by posing questions, exploring uncertainties, and offering
material and speculative approaches” (Agostinho et al. 423).

Speculative Estimates and Forecasts: Calculating the Shape of the
Shakespeare and Company Lending Library
We want to reiterate that missing data is not unique to the Project or any data
derived from cultural materials. In recent years, digital humanities scholars
have proposed a variety of approaches to understand missing data, drawing
3
from several disciplines and methodologies. Drawing on this scholarship, we
begin by estimating the extent of missing data for the lending library during
4
the years Shakespeare and Company was open to the public, 1919 to 1941.
The Project data sets comprise information from three sets of physical sources:
5
logbooks, lending library cards, and address books. However, none of this
data is complete. To fill in these gaps, we use forecasting, modeling, and
statistical techniques to estimate what percent of each of these resources have
survived. While our estimates are far from perfect, they help us understand
the scale of the library and offer a way to begin to grapple with missingness
in archives.

missing membership activity
Although Shakespeare and Company is best known as a hub for expatriate
literary communities in Paris and the publication of James Joyce’s Ulysses,
the Project provides a great deal of data about the day-to-day operations
of the lending library, specifically from the logbooks, which provide daily
records about when members joined, renewed, purchased supplements, made
6
separate payments, and received reimbursements.
Figure 1 details the breakdown of these membership activities across
categories and visualizes the unevenness of these activities over the lifespan of
the lending library. Overall, the data in the logbooks is remarkably consistent;
however, not all the logbooks have survived. Project researchers have compiled
a list of all logbooks, which we used to uncover gaps in these records. Based

3 For examples, see Ryan and Ahnert’s “The Measure of the Archive” (2021), which utilizes network science methods to explore the stability

of historical correspondence networks. In their conclusion, the authors strongly advocate for data curation to include studying “missingness,
and, moreover, where possible, the effect that this might have on resulting quantitative results.” Yet as these authors note, methods from
these fields have yet to be widely adopted among those working in the humanities. One exception is Lincoln and Van Ginhoven’s work on
modeling missing data in provenance data from the Getty Art Institute, where they assert that “such methods should be central to databased digital humanities practice.” More recently, Riddell and Bassett have compared 1830s bibliographies to the Google Books database to
show that works by women were less likely to be digitized than content by their male counterparts. Similarly, Cuthbert debunked the
common assumption in medieval musicology that surviving medieval Italian scores represented only the “tip of the iceberg” by showing that
a large portion of the musical pieces referenced in lyrics survived.
4 We limit ourselves to these years, which cover the bulk of activity during the official years of the lending library. There was a trickle of

activity after 1941, significantly different in scale, which “reflects the fact that Beach continued to loan books after Shakespeare and
Company closed” (Kotin and Koeser, “Data Sets” 28).
5 This work is based on the 1.2 version of the Project datasets. Kotin and Koeser, “Dataset.”
6 For more about these categories, see Kotin and Koeser, “Data Sets” 27.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 1. Membership Activities. The distribution of membership event types over the duration of the library with the
total number of events in the top right.

Figure 2. Weekly activity from logbooks. Gaps highlighted in gray and labeled with the total number of days in each
gap. An interactive version of this figure is available at https://viz.shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/2024/missingdataspecreading/.

on these dates, we have identified seven large gaps ranging from two months
7
to over a year and a half (fig. 2). While these gaps do not prevent researchers
from using the Project’s data, they represent a challenge for any downstream
computational analyses that assume consistent patterns.
To start “reading” this missing data, we turned to forecasting models, and
specifically created a time series model to predict missing events not covered
by the logbooks. To generate these predictions, we aggregated extant

7 We omit four smaller gaps of two weeks or less, half of which occurred around the new year when the shop was likely closed. We also

checked the large gaps against a list of Sylvia Beach’s known vacations compiled by Project researchers to confirm our assumption that these
gaps are due to missing logbooks rather than Shakespeare and Company being closed.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 3. Membership events from logbooks by week, with forecast model and predictions.

membership activity by week based on the date of each event (subscription
purchase date for subscriptions, renewals and supplements; start date for
8
everything else). Forecasting is a popular methodology in data science, often
used to identify trends that can impact business decisions (Taylor and Letham
1, 2). We believe this approach is well-suited to modeling logbooks, which
after all track business transactions. With these models, information from
periods covered by the logbooks can be used to extrapolate the likely activity
that occurred during the gaps. We implemented our forecasts with the
popular Python library, Prophet, described as “a time series forecasting model
designed to handle the common features of business time series” (Taylor
and Letham 5). We selected this library because the parameters and outputs
9
are specifically designed to support the fine-tuning of the models. Whereas
a business analyst might design and interpret a forecast based on their
knowledge of market size or the impact of new products, we use our
knowledge of the membership activity after the logbook gaps.
To create figure 3, we fit a Prophet model based on the number of
membership events per week, and then use that model to forecast over
the identified gaps. Because of the large gaps and the difference in activity
between the 1920s and the 1930s, we fit two separate models for the time
periods. When we aggregate the forecast values for the weeks included in
these gaps, we arrive at a total of 2,335 missing events, with an upper bound
10
of 3,601 and a lower bound of 1,095. Adding our estimate to the existing
11,601 events from the logbooks results in an estimated total of 13,936 events
(upper 15,203; lower 12,350) that would be documented if all the logbooks
were available. Based on this estimate, eighty-three percent of membership

8 We omit nine events that fall within our identified gaps: eight were incorrectly documented as being sourced from the logbooks; the ninth is

documented in a later logbook.
9 Prophet is far from a perfect tool and we acknowledge that there are multiple Python libraries and statistical methods for time series

modeling. However, unlike other approaches, Prophet was designed not for “one-step ahead forecasting [. . . but rather] more for medium-to
longer-term forecasting” (Cotton), and especially for business tasks impacted by seasonality and holidays (which applies to both Facebook
and Beach’s lending library, if at rather different scales!). This combined with the well-documented interface and usability made it seem a
reasonable choice for our use. For more on some of the criticisms and limitations of Prophet, see Cotton.
10 For each of the forecasted values and estimates based on them, we provide the estimated value along with associated upper and lower bound

values. Because forecasted values are uncertain, the model provides upper and lower bounds as a way of quantifying the uncertainty,
essentially helping us consider what would be the minimum and maximum likely number of events to have occurred.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

events (upper seventy-six percent; lower ninety-four percent) are represented
in the surviving logbooks. When we account for the 1,438 membership events
drawn from other sources, we conclude that ninety-four percent (upper
eighty-six percent; lower 106 percent) of membership events are present in
the published dataset.
Since Prophet produces a fairly complex model, we can compare forecast
numbers to estimates made from some basic assumptions about membership
11
activity and back-of-the-envelope math. Using the 11,601 membership
events from the logbooks, we calculate an average of 1.3 events per day
for dates covered by existing logbooks, including weekends and holidays.
While events did not actually occur at this rate, we can apply that average
to the 1,538 days in our identified gaps to arrive at an estimate of 1,999
missing events for a total of 13,600 events that would be documented in
all the logbooks. Accounting for supplemental membership events from
address books and lending library cards, we end up with a total of 13,042
membership events, which would lead us to conclude that ninety-five percent
of all membership activity is documented in the dataset. Given that our
Prophet model, which is more sensitive to the actual historical data, gives us
a ninety-three percent estimate, we are relatively confident that the current
database is only missing between five–seven percent of membership activity.

missing members
Since the percentage of missing membership activity is relatively small, one
12
might assume that all members in the library are listed. Yet because
membership data is missing for much of 1931 and 1932, and all of 1937, it
is likely that there are some lending library members who are not represented
in the dataset. That is, members who were only active within those time
periods, whose lending library cards were not preserved, and who were not
documented in either address book used to supplement the logbook gaps.
In figure 4, we graph the frequency of new members in the library. We
consider a member to be “new” based on the date of the earliest event
associated with an account. The majority of new member events come
from the logbooks, but by aggregating and identifying members who only
appeared in the address books (329 members) or lending library cards (124
members), we can see both the full rise and fall of the library’s membership
over time, as well as those time periods where the address books supplement
significant portions of membership data for missing logbooks.

11 Notebooks in our code repository include cross-validation of Prophet performance training and predicting known time series data.
12 Technically, we can only estimate the number of missing accounts and not members. There’s a slight discrepancy between accounts and

individual members, since the dataset includes forty-nine accounts by two members and six organizational accounts. For convenience and
easier comprehension, we refer to accounts as members throughout this section.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 4. New members by month, based on source. (Blue line: new members by month from any source; purple line:
new members based on logbook data only, i.e. first logbook events for members).

Figure 5. New member subscriptions from logbooks by week, with forecast model and predictions (linear model,
weekly seasonality enabled).

When new members joined the lending library, the first step was to pay for a
subscription, usually with a deposit that was kept as security and reimbursed
when the account was closed (Kotin and Koeser, “Data Sets” 4). And indeed,
when we look at the first events for members, the overwhelming majority
start with subscriptions. Because the extant logbook data is so consistent,
and because the logbooks are the primary source of subscription information,
we can use a similar forecasting approach to estimate the number of new
member subscriptions lost due to the missing logbooks. We start by
identifying all members who had a subscription or renewal recorded in
13
the logbooks as their first event (4,320 members). We then aggregate the
number of new member subscriptions to create a time series similar to
the one discussed in the previous section and then fit a model to forecast
estimates for new subscriptions during the gaps.
Figures 5 and 6 represent two different Prophet models for forecasting the
same missing new subscriptions, based on linear and logistic growth models
respectively. The default linear model predicted fewer missing subscriptions
(458) than the total number of members supplemented from non-logbook
sources (819); meaning that the datasets have more members than would
have been included if all logbooks were available. Yet a visual inspection of

13 “Beach or one of her assistants often indicate whether a membership was a new subscription or a renewal, although these indicators are not

always reliable: renewals are occasionally marked as new subscriptions and vice versa” (Kotin and Koeser, “Data Sets” 7).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 6. New member subscriptions from logbooks by week, with forecast model and predictions (logistic growth
model, weekly seasonality enabled).

the graph for this forecast model indicates that it is picking up a downward
trend from the data before our larger gaps, which results in a forecast that
does not match the data after the gap. To further validate and finetune this
model, we reran the forecast using a logistic growth model, and set a cap of
nineteen based on the maximum number of new subscriptions from all weeks
in our data (the peak is the week of November 8, 1925). When the estimates
from the growth forecasts are aggregated, we arrive at an estimate of 1,027
missing new member subscriptions (upper 1,725; lower 368). When tallied
with the existing 4,320 records from the logbooks we arrive at an estimated
total of 5,346 new member subscriptions (upper 6,045; lower 4,688). When
compared to the 5,139 total number of members across all sources, this
estimate indicates that we are missing 207 members (upper 906; lower 0) and
that the dataset covers ninety-six percent (upper eighty-five percent; lower 110
percent) of the full membership.
To check the results from our Prophet models, we can again estimate using
some simple calculations to see how they compare. On average, there are
about 0.4 unique members per membership event in the logbooks; that
is, roughly every third event adds a new member. If we assume that this
ratio is consistent for the lifetime of the library, then based on our previous
estimation for all logbook membership events we arrive at a total of 5,538
(upper 6,040; lower 4,904) members included in the logbooks if there were
no gaps (399 missing members; upper 901). Based on the 5,139 accounts in
the dataset, this estimate indicates the dataset includes ninety-three percent
(upper eighty-five percent; lower 105 percent) of the members who would
be included in the full set of logbooks. However, since this estimate is
based on our previous estimate for missing membership, the uncertainty is
compounded.
There’s additional complexity to estimating missing members, since the total
number of accounts in the dataset is slightly inflated; there are members with
the same name who are represented as separate accounts, due to Project merge

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

14

guidelines. For example, there are nine different accounts for members
named Kohlberg with dates ranging from 1933 to 1942; at least some of
these accounts are likely the same person, but perhaps not all, and certainly
not all for other members with more common names. As a counter to the
inflated member estimates, to provide a minimum estimate for members we
ran the same calculations but aggregated events by unique member names
instead of unique member ids (effectively merging all unmerged accounts
for people with the same name, which results in a total of 4,720 accounts).
Rerunning Prophet on new subscriptions for these accounts results in an
estimate of 897 missing new subscriptions (upper 1,463; lower 283). When
tallied with the existing 3,975 records from the logbooks, this gives an
estimated total of 4,872 new subscriptions (upper 5,539, lower 4,258), and
152 members missing from the complete dataset (upper 818), resulting in
ninety-seven percent (upper eighty-five percent, lower 111 percent) coverage
of the full membership. When we recalculate the simpler estimate using the
same aggregation, the rate of unique members per membership event goes
from 0.4 to 0.36 and produces a tally of 332 missing members, but the actual
percentages are unchanged: ninety-three percent (upper eighty-six percent,
lower 105 percent) coverage. This result aligns with our intuition that over
the lifetime of the library there would be fewer new members over time, as
previous or existing members returned or renewed their subscriptions. This
matches the forecasted trend for estimated percentage of members missing
going down over time, indicating that we are missing fewer member accounts
than one might expect.
Our estimates offer some bounds for the total membership: 5,350 based on
Project identifiers (which is a slight overestimate) or 4,872 based on unique
names (which is an underestimate). However, in either case the data includes
over ninety percent, or almost all the members.

missing borrowing activity
We hope that the prior estimates will be of use to scholars studying lending
library members, but we expect that many scholars will be most interested
in the borrowing activities of members. Borrowing activity—that is, the
specific books and periodicals that a member borrowed—is tracked solely on
lending library cards, and only a small portion of members have surviving
lending cards, with a larger portion of the cards surviving from the 1930s
than the 1920s (Kotin and Koeser, “Cards in Context”). Based on the extent
of missing cards, we know that this is the most incomplete portion of the
datasets in the Project.

14 According to Project merge guidelines, “the team merged accounts only if they belonged to members with the same name, and the event in

one account clearly fit an event in the other account.” When there was insufficient evidence, they “would rather leave members unmerged
than merge them incorrectly” (Kotin and Koeser, “Data Sets” 18, 19).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 7. Borrowing capacity analysis: subscription volume limit utilization for members with cards.

To estimate missing borrowing activity, we focused on modeling the behavior
of the members with borrowing records and the subscription information in
15
the logbooks, specifically how members utilized their subscriptions. Unlike
modern libraries, which usually allow many books to be checked out at the
same time, subscriptions to Beach’s lending library included specified limits.
The basic subscription allowed members to borrow one volume at a time;
members could pay more to borrow two volumes at a time; or could purchase
a supplement to increase the volume limit (Kotin and Koeser, “Data Sets” 4,
30).
We can think of the number of subscriptions as a window into the
“borrowing capacity” of the library and use that to estimate the missing
borrowing activity (fig. 7). Because subscriptions were expensive, members
typically took full advantage of their privileges, borrowing a book the same
day they subscribed and borrowing a new book on the same day they
returned an old one. In fact, our analysis indicates that members were more
likely to go over their subscription volume limits than underutilize their
privileges and that Beach became much more permissive in the later years
of the lending library (fig. 8). We can illustrate this by comparing numbers
from Project data with a handwritten tally from February 28, 1931, which
notes that seventy-five books were checked out (see fig. 9). On that date, there
are thirty-one active subscriptions documented and thirty-two borrowing
events recorded; because a few of those subscriptions were for more than
one volume at a time (three subscriptions for two volumes each and one
subscription for three), we calculate that based on these subscriptions there
16
should be a maximum of thirty-six volumes checked out. The seventy-five
checked out books documented on that hand-written tally are double what
we would estimate based on subscriptions.

15 We limit our estimates to borrowing activity during the official years of the lending library (1919–1941), which provide ninety-eight percent

of all documented borrowing activity. We use only borrowing events, which make up ninety-two percent of all documented book activity,
because other book events are more idiosyncratic and unsystematic.
16 This date falls within one of the logbook gaps we estimated, which begins February 17, 1931. It’s likely there are additional subscriptions

between February 17 and 28, but it’s unlikely that they account for the number of books out.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 8. Borrowing activity, subscription volumes, and estimated borrowing activity.

Yet even this tally, which is much higher than we would estimate based on
Project data, might be less than the actual activity of the lending library,
given Beach’s propensity not to document free subscriptions. For instance,
Fitch relates that when the composer and critic Virgil Thomson was “too
poor to buy a subscription, Sylvia waived her fee,” so that he could still use
the library (151). Therefore, even if we assume that members fully utilized
their subscription volume limits, we can only estimate a minimum for the
missing borrowing activity. Nonetheless, we believe that this lower bound is
still useful. To calculate this missing activity, we assume a volume limit of one
(again, a minimum) for all subscriptions, renewals, and supplements without
documented volume limits. When compared to the known borrowing
activity, we calculate a ratio of 0.64 borrow events per week. During the week
of December 5, 1920, for example, the active subscriptions with documented
borrowing would indicate that at least nineteen volumes were checked out,
and there are twelve borrowing events recorded that week. When we apply
this ratio to the records of subscriptions without documented borrowing
activity, we arrive at an estimate of 63,330 missing borrowing events, without
accounting for undocumented subscriptions due to logbook gaps. This
means that the 20,597 documented borrowing events provide at best twentysix percent of the full activity of the lending library.
Applying this method to specific time periods with reliable logbook data
demonstrates the high variation in the available data. From the beginning of
the lending library through the end of 1927, before the first logbook gap,
we estimate at best ten percent of borrowing activity is documented (4,459
borrows; estimated total 46,025). The later periods are substantially better
documented: between 1932 and 1937, fifty percent of activity is documented
(5,003 borrows; estimated total 10,111) and fifty-three percent of activity
after September 1939 (3,436 borrows; estimated total 6,503).

missing books
While we expect many scholars will be interested in members and their
activities, there is also a fourth set of information that is incomplete in
the Project—records of books available in the library. The extant borrowing
records include numerous book titles, which have been identified and
Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

17

regularized by Project team members. But if we have at best twenty-six
percent of the full borrowing activity, how accurately do the books in the
published dataset reflect the lending library’s actual holdings? The book
dataset includes 6,020 records; 5,683 of them were borrowed at least once
(some purchases were tracked on lending library cards, but the books were
not necessarily lending library titles). If we exclude the 475 titles that the
Project team has not been able to definitively identify, we arrive at a total of
18
5,208 books with validated bibliographic metadata in the lending library.
This number sounds plausible but based on a handwritten tally in the Beach
papers, we know that there were 4,600 books in the lending library in
February 1931 (Beach, “Total”). Rather than removing unlisted books, we
can use the 1931 total as a starting point. If we identify all borrowing events
that started on or before February 28, 1931, we find 2,874 titles. By looking
at the last borrow status for each item and filtering out the 109 items that
were not returned, we arrive at a total of 2,765 items, or sixty percent of the
total tallied by Beach. While this percentage is lower than we might expect,
it is important to keep in mind that this is based on the earlier time period,
when a much smaller proportion of the borrowing history is documented,
and we expect that many of the borrow events that occur after this date add
to our knowledge of these 4,600 books.
While Beach’s tally is useful, predicting missing books is also a research
problem that transcends the lending library. We can also treat missing books
as analogous to an unseen species, which is a common challenge for
ecologists, who have developed statistical methods to correct for bias due
to samples that exclude species that are difficult to observe or extinct. This
approach has been applied to estimate missing portions of medieval music
scores, digitized books, Shakespeare’s vocabulary, and most recently
manuscripts from medieval European literature, where Kestemont et al. argue
that “parallels between cultural and ecological diversity” mean these models
can and should be applied to cultural artifacts (765; Cuthbert; Riddell and
Bassett; Efron and Thisted).
To create an ecological statistical model of the lending library, we treat each
book title as a unique “species” and the “sightings” of each title is the total
number of times it was borrowed (fig. 10). This approach results in estimates
of total books that vary from 6,768 to 8,102, depending on the method

17 We follow the language of the Project in using book “as a catch-all term: periodicals as well as articles, photographs, phonograph records, and

prints circulated in the lending library” (Kotin and Koeser, “Data Sets” 6).
18 For example, there is a record for volume titled Village, which the Project team believes is likely “either Ivan Bunin’s The Village (1909,

1923) or Robert McAlmon’s Village: As It Happened through a Fifteen-Year Period (1924)” but for now the volume is classified as
“unidentified.” “Village.”

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 9. Handwritten tally of books dated February 28, 1931.

Figure 10. Abundance plots showing the distribution of borrow events per book with a trendline fit. Abundance by
total counts (left) and histogram plot (right). Generated with Copia.
19

used. Based on these numbers, the Project is missing somewhere between
1,560 and 2,894 titles; this means the 5,208 certain titles provide somewhere
between sixty-four percent and seventy-six percent of the total books held by
the lending library.

19 Estimates were calculated using the Python library Copia, using the Chao1 estimate of bias-corrected species richness, from Kestemont et al.

Because we suspected that using raw borrowing numbers might overemphasize periodicals and multi-volume books, we also calculated the
estimates based on the total number of unique borrowers—in effect, treating each individual member’s lending library card as a single
witness to the existence of each title mentioned; these results showed only slight variation from the estimates presented. The lowest estimate
of 6,760 is from Chao1, which provides a minimum. Other estimates were 7,132 (Improved Chao1), 6,699 (ACE), 8,102 (Jackknife), and
7,629 (Egghe & Proot).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

It might seem surprising that such a small portion of the borrowing activity
(at best twenty-six percent) would provide evidence for the majority of the
books that circulated in the lending library (an estimated sixty-four percent to
seventy-six percent). Yet since book popularity distribution follows a power
law, much of the missing borrowing activity would most likely provide
additional evidence for the more popular titles, rather than borrowing records
of these missing books.
Although we find these estimates useful, we recognize that this approach
is not a perfect fit for lending library books. Our estimates treat individual
books as “species,” but it’s likely that many books were only borrowed once,
20
which differs from some of the assumptions in the unseen species model.
We also know the collection changed over time as Beach acquired new books,
and as older books were purchased, went missing, or became damaged, and
this rate of change is surely different than that of species in an ecosystem.
The behavior of lending library members borrowing books is likely more
complicated than these models account for, since we know that the actions
of one member could easily impact others: whether waiting for a book to be
21
returned or recommending books to another reader with similar taste.
There’s one additional resource that might inform our estimate of missing
books, which is a catalog of lending library book acquisitions from March
22
1933 to May 1940 (New Library Books Beach Papers). Of the 1,055 books
included in this catalog, only 106 of them (ten percent) are not included in
the published datasets, which suggests that our estimates of missing books
might be slightly inflated. However, relying on this acquisition catalog data
to estimate the full library holdings is difficult, since we ultimately don’t
know what proportion of the total these items represent. If we examine the
borrowing activity during the dates covered by the catalog, the books in this
catalog account for only forty-one percent of borrowing events and twentyeight percent of the identified items in circulation; so unfortunately, the ten
percent of unknown titles within the catalog can’t be applied to the lending
library collection at large.

Speculative Reading
We know that Beach liked to let members browse and discover books on
their own: “there was no catalog—I preferred to let people find out for
themselves how much is lacking” (Shakespeare and Company 21). In many
ways, the question of how much is lacking is what we have explored in this

20 Ecological models have been applied across a number of disciplines, and the “species” being estimated can be variously defined as “biological

species, individuals of a target population, patients/cases in epidemiology and medical sciences, bugs in software programs, words in a book,
genes or alleles in genetic code, or other discrete entities” (Chao and Chiu).
21 For instance, Fitch notes that there was a waiting list of borrowers for Radclyffe Hall’s Well of Loneliness (1928), which was banned in

England and New York (279). For another example, see Antoniak et al., “Afterlives” (15), in this cluster on Raphaël and Killen.
22 Analysis based on a spreadsheet of acquisitions compiled by Robert Chiossi for the Project.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

article, and we have argued that a great deal remains preserved, including the
names of many of the members who would have perused the shelves and the
titles of the books they borrowed. Ultimately, what remains most “lacking,”
or difficult to assess, is the interactions between these members and books.
Uncovering definitive evidence of individual borrowing remains impossible
without archival discoveries, but surely Beach recommended books based
on a member’s borrowing habits or similarity to other members, or her
own taste? Such recommendations, though dependent on many variables,
are not a foreign concept, given that many of us rely on recommendation
systems used by online bookstores today. Indeed, recent scholarship and
investigative journalism has shown how much of our contemporary cultural
taste is being determined by these types of systems, whether on Netflix or
Spotify or other platforms (Madrigal; Seaver). While we acknowledge that the
political economy and politics of recommendation systems can and are having
enormous impact on everything from data privacy and ownership to ethical
cultural production and dissemination, we believe that these methods can be
generative for studying the past.
Recommendation systems are typically based on two approaches, which may
be used in combination: content filtering, which uses information about users
or items in a system (for example, genre or publication year of a book, or the
age or address for a member) to recommend similar items, or items chosen by
similar users; and collaborative filtering, which uses information about known
interactions “to deduce unknown relationships between users and items” (Hu
et al. 263). For our recommendations, we focus on collaborative filtering since
we have both readers and books (similar to users and items), and implement
two established methods: memory-based and implicit feedback. Memorybased approaches to collaborative filtering utilize simpler distance metrics to
23
calculate which items to recommend based on users with similar behaviors.
Implicit feedback is also a form of collaborative filtering but is more sensitive
to the interactions between lending library members and the books, since
it uses a model-based approach to create predictions. Implicit feedback is
not assumed to convey “preferences and true motives” or even “a positive
view of the product” (Hu et al. 264). For the implicit feedback model, we
used Michael Ekstrand’s LensKit to evaluate recommendation algorithms,
and then implemented a recommender using an implicit matrix factorization
algorithm, which performed significantly better on this data than any other
24
algorithm we tested.

23 For a further example of using collaborative filtering with cultural data, see Pruett.
24 Algorithms were evaluated by normalized discounted cumulative gain, which is appropriate for our intended use: we have no data on ratings

of books, nor are we interested in predicting ratings, but our speculation relies on recommendations being ranked in the correct order.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 11. Membership timeline for Ernest Hemingway; active 1921–1922, 1925–1931 and 1937–1938 (adapted from
Shakespeare and Company Project; chart design by Gissoo Doroudian, implementation by Rebecca Sutton Koeser).

For our preliminary speculations, we focus on Ernest Hemingway. Because
of Hemingway’s fame and interest to scholars, we have a detailed record of
his reading, a catalog of books he owned, and his own comments about his
reading and taste from his letters. This documentation offers an excellent
opportunity to test our speculative methods, by comparing the
recommendations we generated to the list of works Hemingway is known to
have read or owned. In future work, we hope to apply the same methods to
less well-known members, to see what a close reading of the available data and
speculations about their missing data can teach us about the larger reading
and intellectual communities at the library.

ernest hemingway’s missing borrowing
Before speculating, we look to the available data to see what we can learn
about Hemingway’s interactions and behavior as a member of the lending
library (fig. 11). He first subscribed to the library in late December 1921
for just one month, then had two successive three-month subscriptions in
February and August 1922, with gaps of a month or more in between
subscriptions. After another gap of several months, he renewed again in
March 1924 and held three successive year-long subscriptions. His last
documented subscription ended in March 1927, but he continued to borrow
books through the 1930s without an active subscription, likely a reflection of
his special relationship with Beach. There are 117 borrowing events on his
extant lending library cards (132 book events total, with 112 unique titles)
but the earliest one is only from October 1925; none of the activity from
1922 and early 1925 survives.
On average, Hemingway kept books out for thirty-two days (fig. 12).
Sometimes he returned books after only a few days; he returned Wyndham
Lewis’s Time and Western Man (1927) after only a single day in October
1927, and David Garnett’s Go She Must! (1927) was borrowed and returned

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 12. Raincloud plot showing the distribution of the duration of Hemingway’s borrowing activity in days. An
interactive version of this figure is available at https://viz.shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/2024/missingdataspecreading/.
25

on the same day. But there are some books he kept out over a hundred days;
a number of books checked out in May 1926 were not returned for months
that year, including Ivan Turgenev’s Knock Knock Knock and Other Stories
(1921), out 176 days, returned in November; W. H. Hudson’s Far Away and
Long Ago (1918), out 150 days, returned in October; and Nietzsche’s Thus
Spake Zarathustra (1883), out 131 days, returned in September.
The subscriptions with missing borrowing activity span a total of nineteen
months, and in all but one three-month subscription Hemingway subscribed
for two volumes at a time. Based on Hemingway’s typical borrowing
behavior, and assuming full utilization of two volumes at a time when he
had them, he would have borrowed around thirty-three books during these
nineteen months; if we use the library-wide average of eighteen days, he could
have borrowed as many as fifty-nine titles.
To generate these missing books for Hemingway, we utilized the periods
when he subscribed to the library but for which we have no documented
borrowing activity, and then created a list of recommendation candidates
based on books published before or during the subscription period and
held by Shakespeare and Company. We then ranked these titles for each
subscription period, and in figure 13 show the top ten recommendations
generated by our two different approaches, alongside the overall most popular
titles in the lending library (both for all time and within that specific
26
circulation window).

25 The start date for this borrow event is incorrect in the version 1.2 dataset; Reynolds notes the same-day return and the digitized lending

library card confirms it (Reynolds 128; “Ernest Hemingway’s Lending Library Cards”).
26 Hu et al. note that popularity is a useful comparison for evaluation: “this naive measure is surprisingly powerful, as crowds tend to heavily

concentrate on few of the many thousands available shows” (268).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Figure 13. Top book recommendations for Ernest Hemingway.

In figure 13, the top predictions on the left are the results of the implicit
feedback approach, sorted by the coefficient of variation and then median
score for the model. Next are the top recommendations for the memorybased approach, sorted by median score and then coefficient of variation.
We include in our summary the most popular books during the period of
Hemingway’s undocumented borrowing, as well as most popular over the
entire lifetime of the lending library, to demonstrate that our predictions are
surfacing something other than simply popularity. We are intentionally only
reporting scores for books and not periodicals, which, though very popular
in the library, do not have data about individual issues. Figure 14 helps
further elucidate these book predictions by visualizing the individual scores
Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Implicit Matrix Factorization Model

Method for Collaborative Filtering

Subscription Period
1921-12-28/1922-11-08

1924-03-28/1925-03-28

Cosine Distance

Euclidean Distance

The Hairy Ape, Eugene O'Neill

The Outline of History, H. G. Wells

Beyond the Horizon, Eugene O'Neill

Works of Francis Thompson, Francis Thompson

The Shadow Line: A Confession, Joseph Conrad

Avowals, George Moore

The Enormous Room, E. E. Cummings

The Theory of Beauty, E. F. Carritt

The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle, Tobias Smollett

The Age of Innocence, Edith Wharton

English Diaries, Arthur Ponsonby

George Gissing: A Critical Study, Frank Swinnerton

Travels in Arabia Deserta, Charles Montagu Doughty

Lord Byron's Correspondence, George Gordon Byron Byron

Dead Souls, Nikolai Gogol

The Life of Walter Pater, Thomas Wright

The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, Mark Twain
The Wings of the Dove, Henry James

Gold, Stewart Edward White

The Amazing Marriage, George Meredith

The Daniel Jazz and Other Poems, Vachel Lindsay

Here Are Ladies, James Stephens

The Threshold of Quiet, Daniel Corkery

Sard Harker, John Masefield

The Eternal Husband and Other Stories, Fyodor Dostoyevsky

Enjoyment of Poetry, Max Eastman

All Things Considered, G. K. Chesterton

The Sentry and Other Stories, Nikola Semyonovich Leskov

Thomas Hardy: A Critical Study, Lascelles Abercrombie

The Story of an African Farm, Olive Schreiner

A Bed of Roses, Walter Lionel George

Psychoanalysis and the Unconscious, D. H. Lawrence

Villa Rubein, John Galsworthy

The Sacred Wood: Essays on Poetry and Criticism, T. S. Eliot

Mark Twain's Autobiography, Mark Twain

The House of Souls, Arthur Machen

The Van Roon, J. C. Snaith

The Possessed, Fyodor Dostoyevsky
Maggie: A Girl of the Streets, Stephen Crane

Washington and the Hope of Peace, H. G. Wells

Joanna Godden, Sheila Kaye-Smith

Lady Susan, Jane Austen

The Doves' Nest and Other Stories, Katherine Mansfield

The Clash, Storm Jameson

The Psychology of the Unconscious, Carl Gustav Jung

Since Cézanne, Clive Bell

The Works of Edgar Allan Poe, Edgar Allan Poe

Essays and Other Writings of Henry Thoreau, Henry David Thoreau

The White Peacock, D. H. Lawrence

Samuel Butler, Henry Festing Jones

The Lunatic at Large: A Novel, J. Storer Clouston

The Adventures of Roderick Random, Tobias Smollett

Evelina: Or, the History of a Young Lady's Entrance into the World, Fanny Burney

A Book of Burlesques, H. L. Mencken

Henry James, Rebecca West

Gitanjali, Rabindranath Tagore

The Moon of the Caribbees, and Six Other Plays of the Sea, Eugene O'Neill
Moon-Calf, Floyd Dell

Rabindranath Tagore: A Biographical Study, Ernest Rhys

Tales of Wonder, Lord Dunsany

Heretics, G. K. Chesterton

My Antonia, Willa Cather

This Side of Paradise, F. Scott Fitzgerald

Rahab, Waldo Frank

Darkwater: Voices from within the Veil, W. E. B. Du Bois

Shakespeare, Edward Dowden

Virginibus Puerisque and Other Papers, Robert Louis Stevenson

The Man of Property (The Forsyte Saga), John Galsworthy

Shakespeare, William Shakespeare

Back to Methuselah (A Metabiological Pentateuch), George Bernard Shaw
New Voices: An Introduction to Contemporary Poetry, Marguerite Wilkinson

A Short History of the English People, John Richard Green
The Irrational Knot, George Bernard Shaw

Honeycomb (Pilgrimage 3), Dorothy M. Richardson

The Growth of the Soul, A. P. Sinnett

Manalive, G. K. Chesterton

The American Language, H. L. Mencken

Exiles, James Joyce
A History of Elizabethan Literature (History of English Literature 1), George Saintsbury
Dream Psychology: Psychoanalysis for Beginners, Sigmund Freud
Shakespeare, Walter Alexander Raleigh

The Black Monk and Other Stories, Anton Chekhov

Fifty-One Tales, Lord Dunsany

The Mayor of Casterbridge, Thomas Hardy
An Unsocial Socialist, George Bernard Shaw

Man and Superman, George Bernard Shaw

Instigations of Ezra Pound

Letters of Tchehov to His Family and Friends, Anton Chekhov

The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling, Henry Fielding

The Happy Prince and Other Tales, Oscar Wilde

Totem and Taboo, Sigmund Freud

Backwater (Pilgrimage 2), Dorothy M. Richardson

Collected Poems of Thomas Hardy, Thomas Hardy

Gold and Iron, Joseph Hergesheimer
0.5

Sonia: Between Two Worlds, Stephen McKenna

Enjoyment of Poetry, Max Eastman

Appreciations and Criticisms of the Works of Charles Dickens, G. K. Chesterton

0.0

Collaborative Filtering Memory-Based Methods

David Copperfield, Charles Dickens

Howards End, E. M. Forster

−0.5

Pearson Correlation Coefficient

1.0

0.0

score

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

score

Figure 14. Distributions of prediction scores for the top thirty-three books for Ernest Hemingway. An interactive
version of this figure is available at https://viz.shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/2024/missingdata-specreading/.

for each title and providing a longer list of recommended titles using the
more conservative estimate that Hemingway likely read thirty-three books.
On the right are the scores for the implicit feedback approach, with the
scores increasing in confidence from left to right. Each of the ticks in the
plot represents one iteration of the model, which we ran one hundred times
to provide the most consistent sample for scores. Notably, the dispersion of
ticks is not consistent across subscription periods, and there are also some
books that appear in both periods but with differing scores from the model.
We specifically report the coefficient of variation in our table to account for
this dispersion, since we want to recommend books that the model is more
consistently confident about rather than those that might have sporadically
high scores. On the left, we show the scores for the memory-based approach,
which was based on three methods: cosine similarity, Euclidean distance, and
Pearson correlation coefficients. All three methods use the same principle
of comparing borrowers’ preferred books to find the most similar books
Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

to recommend. While many of the scores are consistent, there are some
outliers where one or two of the methods are much more confident in their
predictions; for example, Charles Dickens’s David Copperfield (1850) is the
top recommended book for the Pearson correlation but is ranked much lower
by cosine similarity and Euclidean distance.
Some of our recommendations can be confirmed by Hemingway’s letters and
library catalogs. Hemingway certainly read Willa Cather’s One of Ours (1922),
although he didn’t think particularly highly of it: in a June 1923 letter to
Gertrude Stein, he writes that it “starts getting really good about page 425”
(the first edition was 459 pages), and in a November 1923 letter to Edmund
Wilson, he disparages the battle scenes as drawn from Birth of a Nation. (“I
identified episode after episode, Catherized,” he writes [Letters 2: 29, 80].)
His library in Cuba included Norman Douglas’s South Wind (1917), along
with three other Douglas titles, and David Garnett’s Lady into Fox (1922)
and a Man in the Zoo (1924) (Brasch and Sigman 129, 156). Hemingway’s
library included twelve books by Garnett, some of them duplicate copies, and
he borrowed two Garnett titles from Shakespeare and Company in late 1926
and early 1927. Recent scholarship suggests that not only was Hemingway a
fan of his books, but that perhaps “Garnett has been overlooked as one of
Hemingway’s influences” (Kale).
Many of the other recommended titles are by authors whose books
Hemingway read or owned. He owned five books by Joseph Conrad and
borrowed one from Shakespeare and Company in 1926. In a 1922 letter,
Hemingway writes, “I read the Roosians and Joe Conrad pretty near always
in the country—because they’re so long” (Letters 1: 375). He owned two
books by Joseph Hergesheimer, who he refers to as “Hergo” in a 1925
letter and alludes to in The Sun Also Rises (1926) (Letters 2: 422–423).
He owned two books by Samuel Butler, and mentions Hudibras (1663)
in a 1926 letter (Letters 3: 41). He borrowed one title by Eugene O’Neill,
owned Frank Swinnerton’s autobiography, read Lord Dunsany’s Fifty One
Tales (1915), owned two titles by G. K. Chesterton, and read Chesterton’s
The New Jerusalem (1920) in 1925. He was certainly familiar with Vachel
Lindsay’s work—in January 1924 he cabled Ezra Pound to say he was
rushing “two hundred pound California bathing beauty” to Pound’s bedside,
probably referring to Vachel Lindsay’s recently published Collected Poems
(1923), which was 390 pages long, and elsewhere refers to Lindsay as “the
golden whale” (Letters 2: 96, 97–99).
These recommendations also surface authors that Hemingway was known
to have had strong feelings about. He owned six titles by Max Eastman,
but described The Literary Mind (1931) as “pretentious rubbish” (Reynolds

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

27

120; Letters 4: 615). He owned eleven titles by Henry James, two of
them in duplicate, but Reynolds includes Hemingway’s comment about The
Awkward Age (1899)—“an enormous fake” (Hemingway’s Reading, 141;
Brasch and Sigman, Hemingway’s Library, 202).
Despite Hemingway’s known interest in Russian literature, which is clearly
reflected in his available borrowing record (twelve borrows of Turgenev, some
of them repeats; three of Dostoyevsky, and a collection of Russian literature
from Mirsky), our recommendations only include one title by a Russian
writer, Nikolai Leskov. Perhaps this is because there are so few borrowing
events recorded for Turgenev: the most activity recorded for any of the ten
Turgenev titles is three events, and for four of these titles Hemingway is the
only known borrower.
While we have delved into some of the specific recommendations, in figure
13 we also included the most popular titles for Hemingway’s subscription
periods and the library overall, since popularity is a naive but often effective
metric for recommendations. Many of the listed titles are in fact plausible—if
unsurprising—recommendations for Hemingway. For instance, we see that
titles by James Joyce feature heavily. Hemingway’s extant borrowing records
don’t include any books by Joyce, but Reynolds’s list includes six Joyce titles,
three of which were purchased from Shakespeare and Company in March
1934: Two Tales of Shem and Shaun (1932), Chamber Music (1907), and A
28
Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916). Reynolds notes that Dubliners
(1914) was “probably read by 1924” and Portrait was “probably read in the
1920s” (Hemingway’s Reading, 143). Dorothy Richardson’s Pointed Roofs
(1915) and Honeycomb (1917) were both popular in the lending library,
and while Hemingway’s borrowing records don’t include any Richardson
titles, he owned Dawn’s Left Hand (1931), the tenth and final novel in
the Pilgrimage series, and Reynolds indicates he read it in 1934. He was
certainly familiar with Richardson’s work, since in 1924 he wrote a letter
to her requesting a short story, which was published later that year in the
Transatlantic Review (Hemingway to Richardson, Letters 2: 126).
Though popularity provides some likely insights into Hemingway’s reading
habits, this approach would overlook titles like Hergesheimer’s Mountain
Blood (1915), which was only checked out twice in the entirety of the
library’s history but was highly recommended in our models. Not only
does our speculative approach move beyond simple popularity; many of the
recommended titles and authors that are confirmed or partially confirmed by
Hemingway’s letters and libraries are not authors included in his documented
borrowing history—indicating that these recommendations are based on

27 Eastman’s Enjoyment of Poetry (1913) is the only title in the top recommendations of both our methods (Brasch and Sigman 133–34).
28 An image of the 1934 invoice is included in Beach, Letters, appearing in an unpaginated section of plates.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

commonalities between his borrowing activity and other members of the
library. This finding requires further analysis beyond the scope of this paper,
but we believe even this initial exploration presents the value of speculative
reading, which not only helps confirm the work of previous scholars, but
also opens new research avenues for conceptualizing and studying reading
communities and individual members of the library.

Conclusions and Future Work
From starting with a vague notion that some imprecise amount of data
was missing from the Project, we have demonstrated that this missingness
is something that we can consider as an object of study outright, rather
than something that is incalculable, and thus unknowable. As our estimates
have shown, the Project datasets are rather astonishingly complete in many
aspects despite being based on partial archival records: ninety-three percent of
membership activity, ninety-six percent of members, and sixty-four percent
to seventy-six percent of the books despite only including at best twenty-six
percent of the borrowing activity. We acknowledge that these numbers are
indeed estimates. They are not perfect or conclusive, and future research will
hopefully improve on our methods here. But we do believe that producing
these estimates is crucial for helping other researchers understand the shape
of this data and for giving us substantial grounds for speculation and
interpretation within the remaining missing data. In essence, we have moved
missing data, usually detailed in a footnote for most papers, from the margins
of our analyses to the center.
To understand this missing data, we have also introduced ways in which we
might speculatively fill in those gaps using forecasting and recommendation
systems. Such approaches are relatively established in industry and other
disciplines but remain fairly novel for digital humanities. The one exception
is recent scholarship in digital archives, focused on discovery and
recommending related materials to users. Taylor Arnold, Peter Leonard, and
Lauren Tilton argue that recommender systems are “organization systems”
that go beyond suggestions to shaping knowledge; we propose to take such
systems even further, using them not only to shape but create new knowledge
(S2155). Yet there remains much to explore; there are many ways our
speculative work could be refined and improved, not only our estimates and
recommendations, but through the use of additional methods, including
network analysis, stability measures, and feature importance, which we hope
to explore in future work. We also rely on existing software packages for
several of our analyses, which raises concerns over whether we are as Koeser
has written elsewhere “trusting others to do the math.” We have endeavored
not only to be transparent when using others’ code, but to explain how
these methods work and our decision to use them. As Benjamin Schmidt
has argued, it’s far more important to “understand the transformations that
algorithms attempt to bring about” in our sources and interpret the results
than to implement algorithms from scratch (547).
Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

As a possible next step, we hope to further validate the results of speculative
reading through generating recommendations for some of the less famous,
but most active members, such as Fernand Colens, France Emma Raphaël,
and Eleanor Kittredge. Through expanding our analysis, we hope to gain
insights about the kind of books these individuals borrowed, and more
broadly how their taste aligned with other members of the lending library.
We also hope to continue the approach in this article of modeling the activity
of well-known members such as Nathalie Sarraute, and then corroborating
our recommendations and methods with existing scholarship, as well as
collaborations with literary scholars. Further speculations might be possible
building from the work of Antoniak et al. in “The Afterlives of Shakespeare
and Company in Online Social Readership” in this cluster, where the authors
matched Project book records to Goodreads. We could train recommendation
systems on this larger body of reading activity, identifying similar reading
behavior and even speculating about what contemporary books Hemingway,
Joyce, and others might have read and liked—speculating further across time
and reading communities.
More broadly, we believe our speculative approach has potential for
application to other partial, historical datasets and archives where missing
data can become a space for interpretation, and available information can
provide a means to estimate, quantify, and speculate. Returning to Onuoha,
we agree with her argument that “the word ‘missing’ is inherently normative.
It implies both a lack and an ought: something does not exist, but it
should.” And such a provocation we believe allows us to contend with
missingness not simply as a technical category for measurement, but as a
conceptual framework that considers the structures that create missingness
and the question of whether missing data “should” exist. Such a perspective
is crucial for accounting for the processes that shaped the Project; and it
offers a path to understanding what missingness means—a path away from a
techno-capitalism that identifies missingness as an excuse for compromise and
control, and toward missingness “as an engine of creativity and innovation”
(Agostinho et al. 425). And so rather than attempt to conquer or colonize
these gaps in the Project, we have attempted to understand and interpret
them. Ultimately, we hope to inspire other scholars to not simply accept
missing data as a frustrating but familiar aspect of humanistic research that
must be worked around. Instead, we hope future research will start to treat it
as a generative space for exploration, speculation, and discovery.

Acknowledgments
Our thanks to Amy Winecoff for consulting on recommendation systems and
pointing us to Michael Ekstrand’s Lenskit; to Verna Kale and Sandra Spanier
for reviewing our results for Hemingway and suggesting resources related to
the recommended authors and titles; to Maria Antoniak for feedback on an
Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

earlier draft; to Kevin McElwee for preliminary work describing, structuring,
and estimating the missing data; and to Joshua Kotin for providing book
catalog data, finding Beach’s handwritten tally of books, and editorial
guidance and encouragement. Code and data used for this article is accessible
on https://github.com/rlskoeser/shxco-missingdata-specreading.
Data repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/IFSAMY
Submitted: January 10, 2024 EDT, Accepted: February 12, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

works cited
Agostinho, Daniela, et al. “Uncertain Archives: Approaching the Unknowns, Errors and
Vulnerabilities of Big Data through Cultural Theories of the Archive.” Surveillance and Society,
vol. 17, no. 3/4, 2019, pp. 422–41, https://doi.org/10.24908/ss.v17i3/4.12330.
Antoniak, Maria, et al. “The Afterlives of Shakespeare and Company in Online Social Readership.”
Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.116919.
Arnold, Taylor, et al. “Knowledge Creation through Recommender Systems.” Digital Humanities
2016: Digital Identities: The Past and the Future, edited by Maciej Eder et al., vol. 32, no. S2,
2017, pp. S2151–57, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx035.
Beach, Sylvia. Shakespeare and Company. U of Nebraska P, 1991.
---. The Letters of Sylvia Beach. Edited by Keri Walsh, Columbia UP, 2010, https://doi.org/10.7312/
beac14536.
---. Total of Library Books. 28 Feb. 1931. Sylvia Beach Papers, Department of Special Collections,
Princeton University Library, box 44, folder 1.
Brasch, James Daniel, and Joseph Sigman. Hemingway’s Library: A Composite Record. Garland,
1981.
Carbajal, Itza A., and Michelle Caswell. “Critical Digital Archives: A Review from Archival
Studies.” The American Historical Review, vol. 126, no. 3, 2021, pp. 1102–20, https://doi.org/
10.1093/ahr/rhab359.
Chao, Anne, and Chun-Huo Chiu. “Species Richness: Estimation and Comparison.” Wiley
StatsRef: Statistics Reference Online, edited by N. Balakrishnan et al., Wiley, 2016,
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118445112.stat03432.pub2.
Cordell, Ryan C. “Speculative Bibliography.” Anglia, vol. 138, no. 3, 2020, pp. 521–22,
https://doi.org/10.1515/ang-2020-0041.
Cotton, Peter. “Is Facebook’s ‘Prophet’ the Time-Series Messiah, or Just a Very Naughty Boy?”
Microprediction Insights, 3 Feb. 2021, https://web.archive.org/web/20231211115159/
https:/www.microprediction.com/blog/prophet.
Cuthbert, Michael Scott. “Tipping the Iceberg: Missing Italian Polyphony from the Age of
Schism.” Musica Disciplina, vol. 54, 2009, pp. 39–74.
Drucker, Johanna, and Bethany Nowviskie. “Speculative Computing: Aesthetic Provocations in
Humanities Computing.” A Companion to Digital Humanities, edited by Susan Schreibman et
al., Wiley-Blackwell, 2004, pp. 431–47, https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470999875.ch29.
Efron, Bradley, and Ronald Thisted. “Estimating the Number of Unseen Species: How Many
Words Did Shakespeare Know?” Biometrika, vol. 63, no. 3, 1976, pp. 435–47, https://doi.org/
10.1093/biomet/63.3.435.
Ekstrand, Michael D. “LensKit for Python: Next-Generation Software for Recommender Systems
Experiments.” CIKM ’20: Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Information
& Knowledge Management, Association for Computing Machinery, 2020.
“Ernest Hemingway’s Lending Library Cards.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for
Digital Humanities, Princeton University, 2023, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/
members/hemingway-ernest/cards.
Fitch, Noël Riley. Sylvia Beach and the Lost Generation: A History of Literary Paris in the Twenties
and Thirties. Norton, 1985.
Hartman, Saidiya. Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments: Intimate Histories of Social Upheaval. W.
W. Norton, 2019.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Hemingway, Ernest. “To Edmund Wilson.” The Letters of Ernest Hemingway, vol. 2: 1923–1925,
edited by Sandra Spanier et al., 1923, pp. 79–81.
---. “To Ezra Pound.” The Letters of Ernest Hemingway, vol. 2: 1923–1925, edited by Sandra Spanier
et al., Cambridge UP, 1924, pp. 96–98.
---. “To Ezra Pound.” 1924. The Letters of Ernest Hemingway, vol. 2: 1923–1925, edited by Sandra
Spanier et al., 2013, p. 96.
---. “To Gertrude Stein.” The Letters of Ernest Hemingway, vol. 2: 1923–1925, edited by Sandra
Spanier et al., Cambridge UP, 2013, p. 29, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139017220.023.
---. “To Isabelle Simmons.” The Letters of Ernest Hemingway, vol. 1: 1907–1922, edited by Sandra
Spanier and Robert W. Trogdon, 1922, pp. 374–76.
---. “To Isidor Schneider.” The Letters of Ernest Hemingway, vol. 3: 1926–1929, edited by Rena
Sanderson et al., Cambridge UP, 2015, pp. 41–44, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108937696.
---. “To Maxwell Perkins.” The Letters of Ernest Hemingway, vol. 4: 1929–1931, edited by Sandra
Spanier and Miriam B. Mandel, Cambridge UP, 1931, pp. 614–17.
Hu, Yifan, et al. “Collaborative Filtering for Implicit Feedback Datasets.” 2008 Eighth IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining, IEEE, 2008, pp. 263–72, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICDM.2008.22.
Kale, Verna. “How a Young Ernest Hemingway Dealt with His First Taste of Fame.” The
Conversation, 12 Nov. 2017, https://www.theconversation.com/how-a-young-ernest-hemingwaydealt-with-his-first-taste-of-fame-86037.
Kestemont, Mike, et al. “Forgotten Books: The Application of Unseen Species Models to the
Survival of Culture.” Science, vol. 375, no. 6582, 2022, pp. 765–69.
Koeser, Rebecca Sutton. “Trusting Others to ‘Do the Math.’” Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, vol.
40, no. 4, 2015, pp. 376–92, https://doi.org/10.1080/03080188.2016.1165454.
Kotin, Joshua, et al. “Shakespeare and Company Project Dataset: Lending Library Members, Books,
Events.” Version 1.2, Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton
University, Jan. 2022, https://doi.org/10.34770/8c2s-a169.
Kotin, Joshua, and Rebecca Sutton Koeser. “Shakespeare and Company Project Data Sets.” Journal
of Cultural Analytics, vol. 7, no. 1, 2022, pp. 1–35, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.32551.
---. “The Shakespeare and Company Lending Library Cards in Context.” Shakespeare and Company
Project, 9 Mar. 2020, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/analysis/2020/03/shakespeare-andcompany-lending-library-cards-context/.
Lincoln, Matthew, and Sandra Van Ginhoven. “Modeling a Fragmented Archive: A Missing Data
Case Study from Provenance Research.” The Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
Annual Conference, 2018.
Madrigal, Alexis C. “How Netflix Reverse-Engineered Hollywood.” The Atlantic, 2 Jan. 2014,
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/01/how-netflix-reverse-engineeredhollywood/282679/.
“New Library Books.” Inventories, Order Records, Clients, 1933–1940, 1933–1940. Sylvia Beach
Papers, Special Collections, Princeton University, box 68, folder 2.
Ọnụọha, Mimi. The Library of Missing Datasets. mixed-media installation, 2016,
https://mimionuoha.com/the-library-of-missing-datasets.
Posner, Miriam. “Humanities Data: A Necessary Contradiction.” Miriam Posner’s Blog, 25 June
2015, https://www.miriamposner.com/blog/humanities-data-a-necessary-contradiction/.
Pruett, Jordan. “‘Journals Like You Also Reviewed...’” Jordan Pruett, 1 Dec. 2021,
https://www.jordanpruett.github.io/dissertation/journals-like-you/.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

Missing Data, Speculative Reading

Reynolds, Michael S. Hemingway’s Reading, 1910–1940: An Inventory. Princeton UP, 1981.
Riddell, Allen, and Troy J. Bassett. “What Library Digitization Leaves Out: Predicting the
Availability of Digital Surrogates of English Novels.” Portal: Libraries and the Academy, vol. 21,
no. 4, 2021, pp. 885–900.
Ryan, Yann C., and Sebastian E. Ahnert. “The Measure of the Archive: The Robustness of
Network Analysis in Early Modern Correspondence.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 6, no. 3,
2021, pp. 57–88, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.25943.
Schmidt, Benjamin M. “Do Digital Humanists Need to Understand Algorithms?” Debates in the
Digital Humanities, edited by Matthew K. Gold and Lauren F. Klein, U of Minnesota P, 2016,
pp. 546–55, https://doi.org/10.5749/j.ctt1cn6thb.51.
Seaver, Nick. Computing Taste: Algorithms and the Makers of Music Recommendation. U of
Chicago P, 2022, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226822969.001.0001.
Taylor, Sean J., and Benjamin Letham. Forecasting at Scale. https://doi.org/10.7287/
peerj.preprints.3190v2.
“Village.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital Humanities, Princeton University,
https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/books/village.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

