O’Keefe, Caitlin. “Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company.” Journal of
Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 2, May 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.117123.

ARTICLE

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company
Caitlin O'Keefe1
1 New York University

Keywords: Shakespeare and Company, Sylvia Beach, Gwendolyn Bennett, race, internationalism, Paris Noir, Harlem Renaissance, African American literature,
Black studies, modernism
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.117123

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 2, 2024

In the interwar period, Paris became home to a network of Black writers and
artists from around the world. Using data from the Shakespeare and Company
Project, as well as various archival sources, this article reveals connections
between this network and Sylvia Beach’s bookshop and lending library. The
article begins with the Harlem Renaissance writer and artist Gwendolyn
Bennett, arguing that her relationship with Shakespeare and Company
illuminates a porousness between the “Lost Generation” and “Paris Noir.” The
article then examines how Beach connected writing from Harlem to Black
intellectuals in Paris, who were in the process of creating a new anti-colonial
articulation of race.

The library cards and logbooks preserved in Sylvia Beach’s papers confirm the
conventional image of Shakespeare and Company: the bookshop and lending
library sat at the very heart of interwar modernism. The shop conjures images
of Ernest Hemingway perusing the bookshelves and Gertrude Stein stopping
by from her home a few streets away. James Joyce, George Antheil, and
André Gide are among the many names we associate with the bookshop’s
dazzling community. And the Shakespeare and Company records reflect their
presence.
But the records, digitized by the Shakespeare and Company Project, also
reveal a different community—one not present in these images of the Lost
Generation. The names of Aimé Césaire and Paulette Nardal, architects
of the Négritude movement, also appear in the records: Shakespeare and
Company was a node in the vast and vibrant network that defined the rise of
Black internationalism in Paris, a point of contact for Black intellectuals from
both sides of the Atlantic.
This article explores Shakespeare and Company’s place in this network. It
begins with the Harlem Renaissance writer and artist Gwendolyn Bennett,
and how her relationship with Shakespeare and Company reveals a
porousness between the “Lost Generation” and “Paris Noir” in Beach’s
bookshop. The article then examines how Beach sought to connect writing
from Harlem to Black intellectuals in Paris, who were in the process of
creating a new anti-colonial articulation of race.

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

In June of 1925, Gwendolyn Bennett arrived in France. She came to Paris as
a burgeoning talent of the new Renaissance of Black art that had begun to
flower in the United States. Her poem “To Usward” was published in both
The Crisis and Opportunity Magazine in 1926. As an artist she had gained
early recognition as well: her work was selected as the cover for the Christmas
edition of The Crisis that year. Bennett was twenty-two when she arrived,
alone, in Paris to study art at the Académie Julian on a $1,000 scholarship
from Howard University.
Bennett’s experience was perhaps not exactly what she had been expecting
when she departed from New York. She was certainly enchanted by the
French capital. In a diary entry from her first week in Paris, she wrote “There
never was a more beautiful city than Paris . . . there couldn’t be! . . . One
has the impression of looking through fairy-worlds as one sees gorgeous
buildings, arches, and towers rising from among mounds of trees from afar”
(Diary). But this awe of the city was punctured by the fact that she felt
homesick for America. She yearned for a community, which she found hard
to find in Paris. Shakespeare and Company was just down the street from
her first address in the city and became a place of note and connection for
her. In August of 1925, she wrote Countee Cullen that she had “joined a
very interesting little, private library here - ‘Shakespeare and Co.’ by name”
(Letter). Indeed, the name “Miss Bennett” shows up in Beach’s logbook
in June of 1925, the same week that Bennett arrived in Paris. Her private
writing reveals her attachment to Beach’s shop (Lending Library Logbook).
In one August entry in 1925, she wrote about reading Troubadour: An
Autobiography (1925) by Alfred Kreymborg. Reflecting on the book, she
wrote, “On Reading in Troubadour about Shakespeare and Co I felt the
warmth of contact with the author because I know the place and haunt it”
(Diary).
Bennett’s language when describing the bookshop is so evocative that it fills
in some of the gaps in what we know about her sojourn in Paris. Bennett’s
lending library card has not been preserved, so we can’t know what she read
while she was there, or how often she frequented the shop. But the choice
of the word “haunt” conjures such a specific image, of her returning again
and again, lingering in the bookshop down the street. “Haunt” also imbues
this space with a magnetic quality, implying that she found herself called to
this environment. The word “warmth” also stands out in Bennett’s diary.
Chilly imagery permeates Bennett’s diary when she discusses Paris. She finds
Paris brilliant but cold. Cool gray rain unsettles her during early weeks in the
city; her descriptions of her loneliness are spiked with iciness. The “warmth”
of the shop stands out in contrast. The importance of the shop for her is
also visible in a guide to the city she created for a friend. In her short guide,
she recommends Shakespeare and Company as one of only a few locations
her friend must visit (Untitled List). Miscellaneous papers and unpublished

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

writing found at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture show
Bennett continuing to reflect on Shakespeare and Company and Beach with
fondness as her career progressed in New York (“I Have Seen…”).
Bennett’s correspondence discusses some of the books she borrowed at
Shakespeare and Company. In one letter to Langston Hughes she shared that
she had found Jean Toomer’s experimental Cane (1923) at the bookshop
(Barton). Perhaps she used her subscription to read the writers she felt so
disconnected from when she moved abroad. After all, one of the causes of
her homesickness was that she had the distinct sense that she was missing out
on the flourishing of Black art at home. In a letter to Cullen she expressed
that the shop was interesting because Beach featured all “newer” writers. In
that same letter, she shares that she had been able to purchase Ulysses (1922)
(Letter).
Bennett’s writing shows that her experiences at Shakespeare and Company
were not necessarily congruent with the broader dynamics she encountered
in Paris. Her story “The Wedding Day” (1926) examines the way that Paris
was segregated, expressing an outrage at the treatment of Black Americans in
Paris that is not present in her extant diaries. The story is a biting critique of
the way that American racial politics were imported to Paris, as Americans,
both Black and white, started to populate the city after World War I. The
protagonist is Paul Watson, an African American man in Montmartre, who
purposefully keeps his distance from white Americans who’ve come to stay
in the city. When he does encounter white Americans, he is met with familiar
slurs and violence. Despite his caution, he falls in love with a white American
woman, Mary, who when he first meets her is destitute. This is not a story of
how racial barriers could be surmounted in Paris in a way they could not be in
the United States. On the day of Paul and Mary’s planned wedding, he finds a
note instead of his bride: “white women just don’t marry colored men” (28).
Despite France’s reputation as “color-blind,” Bennett’s short story reveals
a society where American prejudice remains inescapable. While Bennett’s
writing speaks to racism between Americans, her own experience in France
reflected prejudice and exclusion from French society. Bennett spent her year
studying at the Académie Julian after facing rejection from the prestigious
Académie des Beaux-Arts—a rejection she strongly suspected was due to her
race (Barton).
Bennett’s story speaks to the experience of a generation of Black Americans
in Paris. World War I brought African American soldiers to Paris in
unprecedented numbers. For many of these soldiers, the experience of being
in France was shocking. The relative acceptance they found in their French
encounters served as a stark contrast to discrimination faced in the US
Army and at home (Fabre, From Harlem to Paris 49). At the end of the
war, some African American soldiers decided to stay in France, ultimately
helping to create the enduring notion that there was racial equality in the

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

country (Fabre, From Harlem to Paris 53). “Paris Noir,” as historian Tyler
Stovall has called the Paris that African Americans inhabited, became an
undeniable cultural force in the city. But while there may have been less open
discrimination in France, the country was not a land of racial equality. In
Paris, white and Black Americans lived separate lives, even when they did
casually intermingle. As Tracy Denean Sharpley-Whiting writes in Bricktop’s
Paris (2015), the separation between white and Black Americans was even
more pronounced among women (11). Bennett captures this separation in
her short story: the Black Americans live in a lively Montmartre community,
a world apart from white Americans in the center of the city.
For this reason, Bennett’s description of Shakespeare and Company,
traditionally understood as a “Lost Generation” space, poses new questions
about the way that “Paris Noir” and “Lost Generation” Paris overlapped. To
some extent, the Shakespeare and Company records confirm a separateness
between the Black and white worlds in Paris. Based on information in the
logbooks, books by Black authors were never bestsellers, and it must be noted
that books with troubling, exoticizing, and degrading characterizations of
Black people were circulated in the library. As Joshua Kotin and Rebecca
Sutton Koeser note, Margaret Mitchell’s Gone with the Wind (1936) was
even more popular than The Great Gatsby (1925) (“Top Ten Lists”). Yet
when we follow Bennett’s trajectory through the bookshop, we gain insights
into the broader relationship the shop had with Black American art. Bennett
introduced Beach to Paul and Eslanda Robeson at a tea held at Shakespeare
and Company (Bennett, Untitled List). This was a significant encounter.
Paul Robeson would go on to be one of the most significant actors and
performers of the twentieth century, known for bringing a new depth and
humanity to how Black characters appeared on stage. Robeson’s political
voice was as impactful as his stage voice, as he used his platform to promote
his views on segregation, anti-fascism, and communism. Eslanda Robeson’s
writing and research would lead to her own independent involvement in
anti-colonial and anti-racist movements (Ransby). Bennett’s introduction
sparked a productive relationship between the Robesons and Beach: that
year Beach offered Shakespeare and Company to Robeson as a performance
space. At one event, Robeson performed African American spirituals that he
was preparing for his world tour (Weiss 38). Beach ensured that Robeson
not only had a platform, but also fanfare and press as she invited reporters
along with friends to his performance. Adrienne Monnier, Beach’s partner
and the owner of the French bookshop La maison des amis des livres,
covered Robeson’s performance in her literary journal Le Navire d’Argent
(McDougall 56).
When the Robesons came to Shakespeare and Company, they already had a
distinct vision for what Black art could do. In her biography of her husband,
Eslanda Robeson captured his philosophy at the time of his tour: “If I can
teach my audiences, who know almost nothing about the Negro, to know
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

him through my songs and through my roles, as I have learned to know
the sea without ever having been actually near it — then I will feel that I
am an artist, and that I am using my art for myself, for my race, for the
world” (59). Robeson envisioned his performance as an embodiment of Black
American history and humanity, and saw art as a space through which justice
and equality could be realized. Robeson’s performance at Shakespeare and
Company was inherently political. If Bennett’s experience shows Shakespeare
and Company as a welcoming space in Paris, her involvement with the
Robeson performance illuminates a flow of ideas and art, from Harlem to
Paris. This performance also shows Shakespeare and Company serving as a
door between Black intellectuals in the United States and a transnational
public in Paris.
Opening doors like these was significant not just for the Black Americans
in Paris, but for the scores of Black thinkers and artists who arrived in Paris
from across the French Empire. The interwar period was marked by an influx
of men and women from France’s colonies. This influx was in large part a
consequence of World War I, which had permanently altered the way the
French Empire functioned. Over the course of the First World War, 500,000
soldiers were recruited from the colonies to fight in the French army while
200,000 colonial subjects were conscripted to work in France. The French
decision to call upon the colonies provoked a reckoning of racial logic and
Empire, as well as the idea of a “blood debt” that colonial soldiers created,
“a new language” for colonial subjects to challenge their relationship with
France (Boittin 78). In this way, a new space opened in metropolitan France
as a means of paying off this debt. The presence of these new actors from
France’s colonies fundamentally changed the culture of the city, making
the French capital what Jennifer Boittin has called a “colonial metropolis.”
The arrivals of these new groups in Paris created a parallel environment to
Harlem where “people of African descent from a variety of classes and places
converged and formed self-conscious communities” (Wilder 154). Through
this convergence, a new hunger developed to communicate across cultures
and languages, to realize a Black identity that existed beyond the barriers of
nation.
Beach was evidently not only aware of this flow of knowledge between
Harlem and Paris, but determined to help facilitate it. In 1937, she wrote
across the Atlantic to the Friendship Press in New York for expert advice
in curating her lending library’s carefully selected stock. “The French Negro
students in Paris rely on my lending library to keep them in touch, as much
as possible, with American Negro Literature” she wrote to the Press, showing
a familiarity with the nature of the exchange occurring in Paris. “I have a
number of very interesting books by poets and novelists, and studies on the
subject of the problems of the American Negro,” she continued, “but not as

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

many as I should like” (Beach, Letters 178–79). As Beach states, her intent
in seeking out this writing by African American authors was to help connect
Black English and French speakers.
Beach’s articulation of intention is significant. As both Black English and
French speakers were aware, Black aesthetics had become a fad in interwar
Paris. In the aforementioned Bennett story, she wryly marks time in Paris
as before and after “colored jazz bands were the style” (“Wedding Day” 25).
In her diaries she wondered why she had not met Carl Van Vechten, the
white patron of so many Harlem Renaissance artists: “I suppose, though,”
she remarked, “that I shall meet him when I return to America—that’s if his
enthusiasm for colored folk lasts. I doubt it will though.” In a 1928 article
in La Dépêche Africaine, Jane Nardal, a Martinician scholar who, with her
sisters, were key figures in the Négritude Movement, critiqued the way that
Black women in the city were seen as “exotic puppets” in the white gaze (2).
In Colonial Metropolis (2010), Boittin describes the fad of the bals—the bal
nègre, bal antillais, bal colonial, where white French people socialized with
the city’s new Black residents—as often superficial and occasionally fetishistic
(5). It is impossible to determine the motivations of everyone who checked
out books by Black authors at Shakespeare and Company—perhaps some
readers of Langston Hughes or Countee Cullen sought out these books due
to the “tumulte noir.” But what we can tell from Beach’s letter is that there
was a French-speaking Black audience at her bookshop and lending library,
and that these books were to be there for them.
Shakespeare and Company records reveal that the “French Negro students”
included the interwar period’s most significant writers about race. Logbooks
and lending library cards reveal that Aimé Césaire signed up for a
subscription in 1937 just before writing his masterpiece Cahier d’un retour au
pays natal (1939). Paulette Nardal, sister of the aforementioned Jane Nardal,
was also a member of the lending library. She has been called by scholar Brent
Edward Hayes a crucial “cultural intermediary” between English and French
discourses because of her creation of the bilingual journal Revue du monde
noir (120). She also ran a salon, not far from Beach’s shop, where she hosted
leaders of Black internationalism (Edwards 119–20). A “Damas” also shows
up in the logbooks in 1935—possibly Césaire’s collaborator Léon Damas.
Unfortunately the Nardal and Damas lending library cards have been lost,
and with them further insight into the ways that crucial ideas and texts flowed
through Shakespeare and Company. But Césaire’s cards are extant (fig. 1).
The cards offer an especially illuminating glance into not just Shakespeare
and Company but also the larger literary world around it. Césaire first came
to Shakespeare and Company in 1936, where, according to the records, he
sought out new works by African American writers. Twice he checked out

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

Figure 1. Aimé Césaire’s Shakespeare and Company lending library cards. Shakespeare and Company Project, Center
for Digital Humanities, Princeton University (2023), https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/cesaire/cards/.

Hughes’s The Weary Blues (1926). Cullen’s Color (1925), Claude McKay’s
Spring in New Hampshire and Other Poems (1920), and Toomer’s Cane
(1923) filled out the rest of his library cards.
The very presence of Césaire’s cards offer insight into how sought after
these books were in the 1920s and 1930s. Unlike some of Shakespeare
and Company’s more transient American readers, such as Hemingway, who
remembers scouring the bouquinistes to find stray English-language books,
Césaire was well-connected to French institutions when he signed up for a
subscription at Shakespeare and Company. As the address at 45 rue d’Ulm
on his library card indicates, Césaire was a student at the École normale
supérieure. By 1936, his resources would have extended well beyond the walls
of his university. One year earlier he had formed the journal L’Étudiant
noir alongside Léopold Senghor and Damas, which further connected him
to a network of intellectuals in France. The fact that he joined Shakespeare
and Company illuminates how difficult it must have been to access books
by African American writers, and especially the writers of the Harlem
Renaissance, in interwar Paris.
This ability to access African American writers was integral to the
development of Négritude in Paris. “I remember very well that around that
time we read the poems of Langston Hughes and Claude McKay,” Césaire
recalled in a 1967 interview with the Haitian poet René Depestre. The
“Negro Renaissance Movement in the United States,” he explained, was not a
“direct” influence, but “created an atmosphere which allowed me to become
conscious of the solidarity of the Black world” (87). Accessing the literature
Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

of the Harlem Renaissance was necessary to create this “atmosphere,” to
foster this ability to think beyond the parameters of nation. For Paulette
Nardal as well, access to Black writing from America was crucial. In
December 1927, she wrote Alain Locke, seeking permission to translate The
New Negro (1925) (Edwards 128). In September of 1928, the Shakespeare
and Company records show that she had joined the lending library, where she
maintained a membership for two years. The absence of Nardal’s library card
is a great loss, since her presence at the shop raises tantalizing questions. Did
she, like Césaire, use Shakespeare and Company as a resource for accessing
books like Locke’s? Nardal expressed an interest in Harlem Renaissance
authors such as McKay, Hughes, and Toomer (129). Books by all these
writers were in circulation by the time she joined the lending library. Seeing
Nardal’s name among these records, one also wonders if her Shakespeare and
Company reading played a part in the La Revue du monde noir, which she
created in 1931 with Léo Sajous. La Revue du monde noir was a bilingual
journal: each piece appeared in both French and English, with the goal of
opening new channels of communication between the English and Frenchspeaking Black worlds.
It wouldn’t be surprising if Shakespeare and Company did indeed play a
role in helping Nardal create her trail-blazing review. The bookshop certainly
participated in the review’s circulation: Shakespeare and Company stocked
and sold each issue of La Revue du monde noir in 1932 according to
Beach’s logbooks (“Bookshop and Periodical Logbook”). As both Hayes and
Sharpley-Whiting have argued, the role of the Nardals in the creation of
Négritude has been neglected. Senghor, Damas, and Césaire have typically
been characterized as the “fathers” of the movement, while the Nardal sisters
have been cast to the side. Recent scholarship has reframed this narrative,
crediting the Nardals as not merely “midwives” to Négritude, but among its
creators. By circulating Nardal’s work, Shakespeare and Company’s role in
this network came full circle.
The fact that La Revue du monde noir circulated at Shakespeare and
Company also provides insight into the politics of the bookshop and lending
library. As I have explored elsewhere, Beach’s feminist activism was
foundational to the creation of Shakespeare and Company (“Secret Feminist
History”). Beach had been a suffragist in the United States, and done feminist
work in Spain and Serbia, where she worked for the American Red Cross
after World War I. When she opened Shakespeare and Company, she had
been a part of the feminist-socialist network in Paris. The principles of
opening her lending library, which expanded access to English-language
books, resonated deeply with her feminist work. As the data from The
Shakespeare and Company Project has revealed, women were responsible for
seventy percent of the book borrows at Shakespeare and Company. The
circulation of Nardal’s journal, with its feminist politics, shows the way in
which the shop continued to build on its feminist roots.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

Shakespeare and Company closed during World War II. But Beach’s work
to connect prominent Black intellectuals from the United States and France
did not end. She used her cultural connections in Paris in the 1940s to
help Richard Wright establish a foothold in Paris. As the Shakespeare and
Company records indicate, Wright was on Beach’s radar years before they
became friends in Paris. Beach apparently purchased Native Son (1940)
immediately after its publication, as the book shows up in the lending
library in 1940. In the few months the book was available, it was apparently
popular—checked out at least five times between February 1940 and October
1941. Even if Native Son was only in circulation for a few months before
Beach’s shop closed, an analysis of the readers illustrates the reach of the
book. From August to September 1940, Simone de Beauvoir, who often
used Shakespeare and Company to access contemporary American literature,
checked out Native Son. Considering the significant relationship that Wright
would later have with the existentialists, especially de Beauvoir, this early
encounter is especially striking (Fabre, “Richard Wright” 48).
In addition to putting Wright’s book in circulation, Beach helped Wright
interpret the impact of his writing in Paris. As Michel Fabre notes, Wright
was quickly translated into French, in both Sartre’s Les temps modernes
and by Gallimard. Beach’s insights into French readership allowed her to
comment on the reception to his books, which she in part did through
assessing the book’s popularity at La maison des amis des livres. In one of her
first letters to Wright, she notes that Maurice Saillet, one of the booksellers
at La maison des amis des livres, is waiting in anticipation for the translation
of Native Son. Her letters also indicate that she helped Wright find an
Italian translator for his work. In this way, Beach assisted Wright’s transition
to Europe, a transition that would be definitive to the post-World War II
community of Black writers and intellectuals who would settle in Paris.
In Sylvia Beach’s memoir, she writes that her goal of opening Shakespeare
and Company was simple: she wanted to make English language “moderns”
accessible in Paris. The way that Shakespeare and Company connected the
Lost Generation has been explored in great depth. Through considering
Shakespeare and Company’s role in a larger context of Black internationalist
interwar print culture, this article has sought to explore Shakespeare and
Company’s other networks. It is clear that Shakespeare and Company existed
as a point in a constellation of literary institutions that arranged for the
meeting of people and ideas in a way that contributed to internationalist
thinking.
By exploring Shakespeare and Company in this new context, a number of
other questions arise. Sylvia Beach considered Shakespeare and Company to
be only one half of a literary world on the rue de l’Odéon. Her business
and life partner Adrienne Monnier’s French-language bookshop and lending
library, La maison des amis des livres, completed the world that they called

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

“Odéonia.” If the records from Monnier’s lending library were placed
alongside Beach’s, how would this portrait change our understanding of
Black networks in Paris? How did the books stocked by Monnier compare to
Beach’s? Among the names of Monnier’s subscribers might we find Damas,
Senghor, and the Nardals? An exploration of the culture of Odéonia will not
only yield a sharper perception of how these spaces functioned, but will offer
insight into the complex, transnational world of interwar France.
Submitted: January 08, 2024 EDT, Accepted: February 06, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

works cited
“Aimé Césaire’s Lending Library Cards.” Shakespeare and Company Project, Center for Digital
Humanities, Princeton University, 2023, https://shakespeareandco.princeton.edu/members/
cesaire/cards/.
Barton, Melissa. “‘All the News as Well as Scandal’—Gwendolyn Bennett’s Letters from Paris.”
Beinecke Virtual Web Series, 6 Dec. 2021.
Beach, Sylvia. “To the Friendship Press.” 17 March 1937. The Letters of Sylvia Beach, edited by Keri
Walsh, Columbia UP, 2010, pp. 178–79, https://doi.org/10.7312/beac14536.
---. Bookshop and Periodical Logbook. 2 Jan. 1932 to 31 Dec. 1932. Sylvia Beach Papers, Special
Collections, Princeton University Library, box 67, folder 3.
---. Lending Library Logbook. 1 Jan. 1925 to 31 July 1925. Sylvia Beach Papers, Special Collections,
Princeton University Library, box 64, folder 3.
Bennett, Gwendolyn. “Wedding Day: A Story.” Fire!!, Nov. 1926, pp. 25–28.
---. Diary. 1925. Gwendolyn Bennett Papers, Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, The
New York Public Library, box 1, folder 2.
---. “I Have Seen…..” Unpublished Manuscript. Gwendolyn Bennett Papers, Schomburg Center for
Research in Black Culture, The New York Public Library. Microfilm Files.
---. Untitled list of Paris recommendations. Gwendolyn Bennett Papers, Schomburg Center for
Research in Black Culture, The New York Public Library.
---. Letter to Countee Cullen. 28 Aug. 1925. Countee Cullen Papers, Amistad Research Center at
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, box 1, folder 10.
Boittin, Jennifer. Colonial Metropolis: The Urban Grounds of Anti-Imperialism and Feminism in
Interwar Paris. U of Nebraska P, 2010, https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1dfnshk.
Césaire, Aimé. “An Interview with Aimé Césaire: Conducted by René Depestre.” Discourse on
Colonialism, translated by Joan Pinkham, Monthly Review Press, 2000, pp. 79–94.
Edwards, Brent Hayes. The Practice of Diaspora: Literature, Translation and the Rise of Black
Internationalism. Harvard UP, 2003, https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674034426.
Fabre, Michel. From Harlem to Paris: Black Writers in France 1840–1980. U of Illinois P, 1991.
---. “Richard Wright and the French Existentialists.” Melus, vol. 5, no. 2, 1978, pp. 39–51,
https://doi.org/10.2307/467459.
Kotin, Joshua, and Rebecca Sutton Koeser. “Shakespeare and Company: Top Ten Lists.”
Shakespeare and Company Project, 16 Nov. 2020, https://doi.org/10.21428/51bee781.13f8c789.
McDougall, Richard. “Introduction.” The Very Rich Hours of Adrienne Monnier, Adrienne
Monnier, edited by Richard McDougall, U of Nebraska P, 1986, pp. 1–66.
Nardal, Jane. “Pantins Exotiques.” La Dépêche Africaine, Oct. 1928.
O’Keefe, Caitlin. “The Secret Feminist History of Shakespeare and Company.” The New York
Review of Books, 18 Nov. 2019, https://www.nybooks.com/online/2019/11/18/the-secretfeminist-history-of-shakespeare-company/.
Ransby, Barbara. Eslanda: The Large and Unconventional Life of Mrs. Paul Robeson. Yale UP, 2013.
Robeson, Eslanda. Paul Robeson, Negro. 1930. Read Books Limited, 2011.
Sharpley-Whiting, Tracy Denean. Bricktop’s Paris: African American Women in Paris between Two
World Wars. SUNY Press, 2015.
Weiss, Andrea. Paris Was a Woman: Portraits from the Left Bank. Pandora, 1995.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Black Internationalism and Shakespeare and Company

Wilder, Gary. The French Imperial Nation-State: Negritude and Colonial Humanism Between the
Two World Wars. U of Chicago P, 2005, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/
9780226773858.001.0001.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

