Frishkopf, Michael. “Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social
Network Analysis Approach to Music History.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 3,
June 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.117486.

ARTICLE

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social
Network Analysis Approach to Music History
Michael Frishkopf1
1 University of Alberta

Keywords: Egyptian song, Social Network Analysis, Music, History, Poets, Poetry, Composers, Composition, Egypt, Arab
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.117486

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 3, 2024

In this paper I formulate and apply a social network analysis methodology for
understanding the history of song on Egyptian radio. Music is a massively
relational cultural form, involving interactions among composers, poets,
arrangers, conductors, and performers, among others. The reality of music
history thus emerges as a complex network of relationships, unfolding and
changing over time. Song production, in particular, centers on poet-composersinger collaborations. Many Arab music histories highlight narratives of the
stars, presented in historical and cultural context, but neglect the broader
network of productive relationships. However many important musical figures
are not celebrities, and the full complexity of the non-linear network can only
be grasped holistically, including big data empirical analysis, not pointillistically
through case studies of celebrities. Such holistic analysis can reveal surprising
emergent, structural patterns that are not apparent in any single narrative.
Social network analysis (SNA) offers a powerful suite of tools enabling such an
approach, including metrics for centrality and the detection of cohesive
subgroups. Starting with a large dataset of songs broadcast on Egyptian radio, I
extract a network of poet-composer collaborations, and apply SNA algorithms
to reveal its social structure. I then interpret that structure in light of wider
socio-cultural and historical factors. In this way, my paper both sheds light on
Egypt’s musical history, and supplies a model and method that may be applied,
mutatis mutandis, to other musical domains.

I. Introduction
A. The history of music, music history, big data, and social
network analysis
How do we transform the history of music into music history? How well
do prevailing modes of historiography reflect musical reality? Music emerges
from social interactions interconnecting myriad agents, for music is a
collaborative art, arising from, as well as forging, relationships. Occasional
appearances to the contrary, individuals never make music alone. But
celebrities loom large in music culture, especially since the emergence of
media technologies and the music industry. Music histories are thus prone
to telling linear stories of star composers or performers. Such histories lie far
from music’s expansive, tangled reality, because they are both reductive and

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

atomizing. To understand the full social complexity of musical life requires
both big data, and relational data, combining to form large social networks
representing musical interactions.
Taking a broad view of music to include all “musicking” (Small), this network
should include myriad roles: composers, poets, performers, arrangers,
conductors, and producers, as well as dancers, impresarios, venue managers,
distributors, broadcasters, critics, audiences, consumers, and listeners
generally. Ideally, musical historiography would include the representation of
countless collaborations among all these musical participants, unfolding over
time. Such a task would be impossible, even for relatively well-documented
music.
But in every place and time certain roles are more important to musical
production than others. Modern Arab music centers on precomposed song,
produced primarily by relationships connecting poets, composers, and
singers. How can we understand Arab music history by applying social
network analysis (SNA) to composer-poet collaborations? My paper aims to
1
answer this methodological question.
Most music histories do not adopt a big data approach, in the past perhaps
because such data was not readily available. But the advent of the modern
music industry both radically altered musical reality, and generated the big
data to describe it. Here, I define musical modernity in technological terms.
Recording and broadcasting drew a bright historical line, utterly transforming
the musical landscape, from the introduction of the phonograph in the late
19th century, to radio and musical films, TV, LPs, cassettes, and CDs, down
to contemporary music streaming services. Alongside these technological
transformations came seismic shifts in the modes and relations of music
production, from a small-scale live performance art, to a complex music
industry founded on technologies of recording and dissemination. The Arab
world was no exception (Malm; Frishkopf, Music and Media).
The same factors producing musical modernity, technology and industrial
complexity, both enabled and required the construction of large music
databases, yielding big data. Technologies for media recording, transmission,
dissemination, and archiving offered the possibility for cataloging such data,
while music’s embedding in an industrial system necessitated it, for the
sake of tracking production, distribution, and sales; intellectual property
management; accounting of royalties and taxes; and sometimes government
censorship. Thus, big data emerged out of both technological possibilities and
administrative need.

1 While this article focuses on relations of poets and composers, an extension to singers is planned for the future. Sincere thanks to my

colleague and friend, Egyptian writer Yasser Abdel-Latif, who, thanks to his vast knowledge of Egyptian music, provided invaluable
assistance correcting the database at the heart of this analytical project. This paper draws on research supported by Canada’s Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

For example, Egyptian radio has broadcast music, of different styles and eras,
ever since its founding in 1934 (El-Shawan, “The Socio-Political Context
of al-Musika al-ʿarabiyyah in Cairo, Egypt: Policies, Patronage, Institutions,
and Musical Change (1927-77)”). In order to locate recordings of suitable
length, genre, and personnel, to properly announce them, and to transfer
use statistics to performing rights organizations, it was essential to catalog
them. Once computer technology provided the means, large song databases
were developed containing metadata, including song title, and the names of
collaborating singer, composer, and poet, as well as the date and duration of
the recording. Such song lists provide an excellent starting point for social
network analysis of musical relationships, as I will demonstrate in this paper,
and they are crucial for understanding modern Egyptian musical history,
due to the centrality of state radio throughout the middle third of the 20th
century, at least until the cassette era of the late 1970s, and even thereafter
(Castelo-Branco; Boyd; Fahmy).
However, resistance to big data representations of music history stems also
from a particular methodological disposition. The prevailing music historical
norm among academic musicologists has been to critically interpret “small
data”, a relatively limited number of salient cases, even if conceptually
embedded within a wider cultural landscape. In an earlier era music historians
centered their studies almost entirely upon biographies of a relatively small,
select group of music’s “great men” and their works, typically excluding
women, but also deemphasizing the social connections that actually
constitute music culture. While a narrative appreciation of key figures and
works may be necessary to attain a humanistic understanding of music
history, such an approach is insufficient for a sociological one.
Since the 1990s, following the rise of Postmodern, New, or Cultural
Musicology (Kramer), musicologists have broadened their scope to cultural
studies, considering music practices more critically within a wider sociomusical space beyond “great” individuals and works, supported by diverse
disciplinary perspectives—gender studies, political economy, post-colonial
studies, or ecology (Rehding; Solie; Qureshi; Locke)—broadening the canon,
but without entirely relinquishing attachment to the concept of musical
luminaries. Small data non-relational qualitative study has remained central
to musicology, albeit now embedded in a wider context.
More recently, there have been counter-trends. Particularly since the late
1990s’ advent of social media, many music scholars began to deploy the
“social network” concept as a potent metaphor, though mostly without
its development as an empirical object of investigation (Ozment). In
ethnomusicology, always more attuned to the social, scholars have applied
social network concepts qualitatively to diagram small groups (Brinner;
Frishkopf, “Music for Global Human Development: Participatory Action
Research for Health and Wellbeing”). With the increasing prominence of

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

digital humanities in the late 2000s, quantitative big data computational
empirical musicology and ethnomusicology has made a confident appearance
as well (Gómez et al.; Weyde et al.; Kent-Muller; Urberg; Abdallah et al.;
Cottrell; Clercq). But most of this research centers on datasets populated
with bibliographic, catalogue, score, transcription, or audio data, and
associated metadata, rather than on the social networks underlying music
production, though some bibliographic studies have included techniques of
network analysis (Rose et al.).
Social network analysis requires big social data – and near-complete data.
Such data is not always easily obtained. Missing data and consequent issues
of imputation are thorny compared to those of conventional non-relational
statistics, and constitute an enormous problem for social network analysis
(Krause et al.; Kossinets). Perhaps in part for this reason SNA musicological
studies are scarcer, though the literature is growing (see Giannetti). Nick
Crossley and his colleagues have made numerous contributions (McAndrew
and Everett; Crossley, Networks of Sound, Style and Subversion; Crossley,
“Music Worlds and Event Networks”; Crossley and Ozturk; Crossley and
Ozturk; O’Shea). Scholars from math, physics, and engineering, working in
the new sciences of network and complexity studies, and bringing stronger
technical skills for data collection and analysis, have delved deepest into
musical SNA, studying large networks of musical influence, similarity, and
collaboration, though mainly in Western music, where data is more readily
available (Gienapp et al.; Zhang et al.; Park et al.; Ortega; Bryan and Wang).
Arab music has not lagged much, if at all, in absorbing new technologies
and modes of music production. The earliest Egyptian recordings date to
around 1904 (Racy, “Record Industry and Egyptian Traditional Music” 25),
numerous radio stations were active in Cairo from the 1920s, musical film
emerged in 1932, and national radio in 1934 (El-Shawan, “The Socio-Political
Context of al-Musika al-ʿarabiyyah in Cairo, Egypt: Policies, Patronage,
Institutions, and Musical Change (1927-77)” 94, 97; Fahmy). Consequently,
music changed rapidly as well, in both its sonic and social aspects. Traditional
Egyptian music of the 19th and early 20th centuries—later known as the
turath (heritage)—centered on poetry set to melodies based on a system
of modes (the maqamat) and meters (the iqaʿat), accompanied by a small
heterophonic chamber ensemble. Within this repertoire, the precomposed
metric song, featuring classical or colloquial Arabic poetry, was central.
Instrumental pieces and improvisations served primarily as preludes or
transitions. But vocal improvisation – particularly the mawwal and qasida –
was also important, and in any case the singer was typically the composer as
well – often accompanying him or herself on the oud (a type of fretless lute).
A series of pieces in a common mode constituted a longer suite, the wasla,
whose performance might require an hour or more (Lagrange; Racy, “Music
in Nineteenth-Century Egypt: An Historical Sketch”; Racy, “Waslah”).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Starting from the early 20th century, new media technologies dramatically
altered this musical scene, though certain elements were retained. Within the
Arab world, Egyptian music remained in the vanguard, due to the country’s
large population, central location, proximity and openness to Europe, and
status as a cultural hub. Transformations wrought by technological
innovations along with corresponding changes in modes of production hit
Egypt first, and most forcefully (Racy, Musical Change and Commercial
Recording in Egypt, 1904-1932).
Retentions from the older turath included a continued focus on song, with
lyrics and hence singer central, in contradistinction to the greater prominence
of instrumental genres in other Middle Eastern musics, particularly Turkey
and Iran. But with the advent of a capitalist media economy requiring a
consistently polished product, and due to length restrictions (the phonograph
cylinder could only hold around two minutes of music; 78s only slightly
longer), precomposed songs soon became the norm. Improvisation declined,
and ensembles expanded, necessitating carefully prepared arrangements. All
of these factors led to greater specialization. The centrality of precomposed
song meant that distinct figures of composer and poet were now central as
well, and increasingly separated from roles of singer, instrumentalist or (later)
arranger or producer (Frishkopf, Music and Media).
Arab music histories remain primarily rooted in the older school of small
data critical interpretation, often centered on lives of the “great” singers
and composers. Those written in Arabic are particularly prone to such
tendencies, perhaps because the limited market for such works is primarily
a popular one, fascinated by celebrity. Books surveying a wider swath of
musical history typically present a series of capsule biographies, whether
covering the modern period, or stretching back over a thousand years to
the legendary, swashbuckling figure of Ziryab (Zaki, Aʿlam al-Musiqa alMisriyya ʿabr 150 sana; Zaki, al-Muʿasirun min Rawwad al-Musiqa alʿArabiyya; Mursī; Najmi; Darwish; Sahab).
Several recent scholarly studies in English likewise focus upon a single
celebrated performer or composer (Danielson; Zuhur; Frishkopf,
“Nationalism, Nationalization, and the Egyptian Music Industry”), though
contextualized within cultural history. Other English-language studies present
broader social histories of music, transcending a focus on the individual,
yet remaining largely in the camp of small data, qualitative interpretation,
centered upon prominent individuals, though Salwa El-Shawan’s scholarly
oeuvre presents some quantitative analyses as well (Racy, “Sound and Society:
The Takht Music of Early-Twentieth Century Cairo”; Racy, “Music in
Nineteenth-Century Egypt: An Historical Sketch”; El-Shawan, “Western
Music and Its Practitioners in Egypt (ca. 1825-1985): The Integration of
a New Musical Tradition in a Changing Environment”; El-Shawan, “The
Socio-Political Context of al-Musika al-ʿarabiyyah in Cairo, Egypt: Policies,

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Patronage, Institutions, and Musical Change (1927-77)”). Again, Brinner’s
exemplary study of Israeli and Arab musicians applies social network theory,
but in a qualitative, small data manner. Without a doubt, all these works
contribute importantly to Arab music history, and yet small data limitations
mean that they also miss emergent patterns that can only be discerned
through a big data social network analysis approach.
Indeed, the lack of a big data, inclusive, and relational approach to music
history means that salient features of the music network may be overlooked
entirely. For instance, to foreshadow my own conclusions: never in all my
readings on Arabic music did I encounter mention of the most productive
collaboration in mid-20th century Egyptian song: that of lyricist Hussein alSayed (1916 - 1983) and composer Mohamed Abdel Wahab (1901 – 1991).
Individually these figures are well known (though only Abdel Wahab shines
in music history). But the fact that theirs was the most productive partnership
in modern Egyptian song is not, because this fact is not traversed in any
individual narrative. Yet it is an important fact of Egyptian music history, due
to the centrality of relationship in the production of the musical art. Using a
big data SNA approach, facts such as this one immediately pop out, ripe for
interpretation.
To summarize: two primary problems afflict music historiography, masking
salient features of music history, and particularly in the Arab world: a
tendency to interpret a small number of cases, i.e. a lack of big data, and
a tendency to atomize: a lack of relational data. These problems can be
ameliorated simultaneously by collecting and analyzing large quantities of
relational data: big social networks.
In this paper I outline an SNA approach to Arab music historiography,
predicated on the mid-20th century social and musical centrality of Egyptian
state radio and the modern concept of the fully precomposed Arabic song.
This approach comprises two phases: (1) assembly and analysis of a social
network representing musical collaborations between poets and composers,
thereby highlighting salient facts and suggesting key questions, and (2)
interpretation of these facts and pursuit of these questions, by situating the
network within a wider social, cultural, and historical context. I apply (1) to
highlight key agents and structures of Egypt’s modern musical history, based
on big relational data, while leaving (2) to the future. In the process, beyond
any specific conclusions that may be drawn, I aim to illustrate a transposable
method that might be applied, mutatis mutandis, elsewhere.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

2

B. Social Network Analysis

Social network analysis (SNA) begins with an abstraction: the concept of
network, of broad applicability to many real-world problems. Formally, a
network is a set of nodes, together with a set of links. Each link (or tie) can
be defined as a pair of nodes, whether ordered or unordered. The pair is
thus connected, and each node is said to be a neighbor to the other. The
ordered pair (a,b) represents an asymmetric directed link pointing from node
a to node b, while the unordered set {a,b} represents a symmetric undirected
link joining a and b. A network containing directed links is called a directed
network. While every link connects exactly two nodes, one at either end, a
node can be connected by any number of links. In principle two nodes might
be connected by many links, but in a so-called “simple” network at most one
link connects each node pair. A node’s degree is the number of links by which
it is connected, which—in a simple network—is the same as the number of
3
its neighbors.
A network is highly abstract, but it admits of many useful real-world
interpretations. Social network analysis centers on networks for which nodes
and links are given social interpretations. Nodes typically represent social
agents (people or organizations), while links represent relations between
those agents – undirected for reciprocal relations (such as “consanguinity”,
“collaborating with”) and directed for non-reciprocal relations (such as
“admires”, “teacher of”).
Nodes and links have properties, represented by numbers. Some of these
properties are derived from network structure (e.g. a node’s degree); others,
sometimes called “attributes”, are derived from the network’s real-world
interpretation (e.g. a node’s gender) rather than structure. Links are often
associated with a property called “weight”, typically indicating its strength.
An unweighted network is formally equivalent to a weighted network in
which all weights are equal to 1; these are used interchangeably. A node’s
weighted degree is the sum of the weights of the links to which it is
connected. In general degree and weighted degree are different. But if an

2 The roots of social network analysis lie in the sociometry of Jacob Moreno and others, dating to the 1930s. The field blossomed in the

1970s; Freeman provides an excellent history (Moreno; Freeman, The Development of Social Network Analysis: A Study in the Sociology of
Science). Over the past 20 years a broader and increasingly popular field, network science, has emerged as a productive theoretical and
methodological approach to formulating and solving problems across a wide range of disciplines, from physical and biological sciences to
ecology, medicine, psychology, sociology, linguistics, business, and technology, especially as the online world, both hardware and software, is
explicitly formulated in these terms (e.g. computer networks, social media networks). Correspondingly, a wide range of books on the topic
have appeared in recent decades, some devoted to to network science in general (Newman; Barabasi, Network Science), and others to social
network analysis in particular (Wasserman and Faust; Scott; Nooy and et al.), as well as numerous popular science treatments (Barabasi,
Linked; Watts; Christakis and Fowler). At the root of it all lies the mathematical theory of graphs (Biggs et al.; Wilson). Rather than trace
this history, my presentation in this introductory section draws on these sources to succinctly sketch SNA’s principal ideas, in a manner
simple enough to be understood by any reader, yet sufficient to enable comprehension of the analysis that follows.
3 To avert possible confusion it is useful to note, at the outset, that mathematicians employ a different terminology: for them, networks are

graphs, nodes are vertices, directed links are arcs, and undirected links are edges. Some social network researchers define a network as a graph
representing real-world phenomona, and hence augmented with a social context, and metadata: numerical attributes associated with vertices,
edges, and arcs, but not derivable from the mathematical structure itself. (Nooy and et al. 8)

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

unweighted network is exchanged for its weighted equivalent, degrees in
the former will match weighted degrees in the latter. When n multiple,
unweighted links connect two nodes they can be replaced by a single link of
weight n without loss of information. Replacing all such multiple links across
an unweighted non-simple network results in an equivalent weighted, simple
network.
A network in which any two nodes can be connected is called “one-mode”: its
nodes are homogeneous with respect to connection. Such a network can be
represented by a square table, or matrix, with an equal number of rows and
columns. The nodes are numbered and listed to the left of the first column,
and above the first row. Then the presence of a directed link from node m
to node n is indicated by writing the link’s weight (or “1” for an unweighted
network) into the cell located in row m and column n. If the network is
undirected, we use the lower left triangle only, since cells in the upper right
triangle represent the same node pairs.
While a network can be represented geometrically – in two, three, or higher
dimensions – in theory, spatial layout is immaterial for representing its
structural properties. But visualization is exceedingly valuable for
understanding and interpretation, due to the acuity of our visual sense, and
our ability to recognize visual patterns. The abstract network structure can
be physically instantiated and visualized as a set of balls (representing nodes)
connected by strings (links), such that each string connects exactly two balls.
For directed links the string is assigned a beginning and end.
More practically, we may also draw the network on a flat piece of paper, using
circles (or any closed shape) for nodes and lines for links. For directed links,
direction can be indicated by an arrowhead. Node and link properties may
also be visualized as, for instance, node area or line thickness (for quantitative
properties), or color (for qualitative ones).
But because only connections matter, all visual representations are accurate so
long as connections are drawn correctly. Three nodes connected in triangular
formation with three links can be represented as an equilateral triangle of any
size, or a scalene triangle with three lengths at different orders of magnitude
entirely: a millimeter, a meter, and a kilometer. (Of course it is important for
the drawing to fit on a page!)
However, among all drawings that fit, some are far more useful as
visualizations than others. For the sake of visualizing network structure it
is helpful to draw a network so as to represent the relative importance of
each node and link. Since link crossings are meaningless (only link-node
connections are significant), visualizations strive to minimize them (crossings
mistakenly imply that the point of intersection is important), as well as
to ensure that structurally central nodes are visually central too (rigorous
definitions of node centrality will follow). In an unweighted network, all

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

links should be of roughly equal length (if higher weight indicates a stronger
connection, e.g. more frequent collaboration, then weightier links should be
shorter).
One way to optimize a network drawing is to apply a force-directed layout
algorithm. Such algorithms, of which several are well-known, take each link
to be a spring with fixed natural length. When compressed to become shorter,
or stretched to become longer, the spring exerts a contrary force, roughly
proportional to the change in length, thus requiring that energy be expended,
4
stored as potential energy in each compressed or stretched spring. Nodes can
be also be modeled as positively charged particles that repel each other when
not connected, tending to reduce inadvertent line crossings. Using an iterative
physical simulation, the layout algorithm determines node positions so as
to minimize total potential energy, i.e. maintaining link lengths as close as
possible to their neutral (unstretched) state and increasing distance between
nodes not connected by a link. The simulation halts when adjustments are
no longer reducing energy, or after a maximum run time.
Since rotations and translations do not affect total energy, the resulting
positioning will not be absolute but only relative. Furthermore simulation
of this physical process must begin with random positioning. Another factor
determining the final positioning of nodes is simulation length. For all
these reasons, different runs may produce different results. Two commonly
used force-directed layout algorithms are Kamada-Kawai, and FruchtermanReingold. Either may be set to account for link weights, such that shorter
strings model stronger links. (Kobourov; Kamada and Kawai; Fruchterman
and Reingold)
A undirected network may be connected or disconnected; a connected piece
is called a component. Representing the network using balls and fixed-length
5
strings, lifting a single ball raises the entire component to which it belongs.
Note that a component could be as small as a single disconnected node;
conversely, the entire network may comprise a single component.
In this study, I represent song production data as a network by assigning each
artist (poet or composer) a distinct network node, and each unique song an
undirected link connecting its poet and its composer, representing a single
collaboration. For the preliminary analysis described in this paper I do not
include any other artists (singers or instrumentalists) in the network. Every
node has a binary attribute, indicating its role: poet or composer. Artists who
fulfill both roles (i.e. serving as both poet and composer) are represented by
two different nodes. Clearly this network is not simple, since a collaborating
pair (poet and composer) frequently produce several songs together, leading

4 The approximation that a spring’s force is proportional to its stretching or compression is known as “Hooke’s Law” (Feynman, vol 2, 38-1).
5 The definition is slightly more complex for directed networks.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

to multiple links between the two. But we can replace such multiple links
with a single weighted link, thereby arriving at an equivalent simple weighted
network, as explained earlier.
The resulting network is also bipartite, or “two-mode”, because the set of
nodes can be divided into two types or “modes” (here, poet nodes, and
composer nodes), such that every link connects an element of one set to
an element of the other. This result follows from the definitions, since
every collaboration connects a composer and poet (and since an individual
functioning as both poet and composer is assigned two different nodes
corresponding to the two roles). Whereas a one-mode network can be
represented by a square matrix, a two-mode or bipartite network is better
represented as a rectangular matrix with m rows and n columns, where m
is the number of nodes in the first mode (e.g. poets) and n is the number
of nodes in the second mode (e.g. composers). Every cell in such a network
represents a possible collaboration. (See Borgatti and Everett)
Earlier I mentioned that there are several ways of evaluating node centrality.
In this paper, I deploy five centrality metrics: (1) Degree centrality, (2)
Weighted degree centrality, (3) Closeness centrality, (4) Betweenness
centrality, and (5) Eigenvector centrality. (See Nooy and et al. ch. 6; Freeman,
“Centrality in Social Networks Conceptual Clarification”; Wasserman and
Faust, ch. 5)
Degree and weighted degree centrality have already been introduced. Recall
that link weight represents the number of collaborations between a composer
and a poet. Then degree centrality measures an artist’s total number of
collaborators, while weighted degree centrality measures the artist’s total
number of collaborations (songs).
For two other kinds of centrality—closeness and betweenness—we require
additional network concepts of geodesic, and geodesic distance. An
(undirected) walk between two network nodes N1 and Nn is a sequence N1,
L1, N2, L2, N3, L3…. Nn-1, Ln-1, Nn such that the N’s are nodes, the L’s are
links (for this definition, we’ll ignore link direction, if any), and the sequence
is connected: L1 links N1 and N2; L2 links N2 and N3, and so on, down to
Ln-1 which links Nn-1 and Nn. The length of such a walk is the number of
links it contains (here, n-1). Since this number is an integer, there must be
a shortest length walk between N1 and Nn (though there may be more than
one walk of this length). Each such shortest length walk is called a geodesic,
and its length is the geodesic distance between N1 and Nn. The geodesic
distance is well-defined for two nodes in the same component; for two nodes
in different components there is no walk connecting them. Then we can
either say that the geodesic distance is undefined, or that it is infinite.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

The closeness centrality of node N is the reciprocal of the average distance
from N to all other nodes, equivalent to the number of other nodes divided
by the sum of its geodesic distance to each of them. Those that are closer,
on average, to all other nodes, rendering the denominator smaller, will
display a higher closeness centrality value. To compute node N’s betweenness
centrality, consider all pairs of other nodes. Each such pair may be connected
by one or more geodesic. For each such geodesic we may ask: does it pass
through N? N’s betweenness centrality is the fraction that do. Note that
to compute closeness centrality a network must be connected, comprising a
single component. Betweenness centrality, however, can be computed for any
network, connected or not.
Finally, eigenvector centrality is a recursive metric: the centrality of a node
N depends on the centrality of its neighbors. Link weight can also be taken
into account, such that high link weights imply greater centrality. I will not
present the mathematical details, but they are available online for those who
6
are interested.

II. SNA for Egyptian music history
A. Egyptian song data as a social network
Like other media institutions, Egypt’s public broadcaster, the Egyptian Radio
and Television Union (Ittiḥād al-Idhāʿa wa al-Tilifizyūn al-Miṣrī) maintains
a database of their their musical recordings, for programming and intellectual
property rights (IPR) management, since song creators must receive royalties.
Each database record contains a song title, as well as the names of composer,
poet, and singer, along with other relevant information. A song may appear
in the database more than once, due to multiple recordings by the same
singer, or by different singers.
We can easily convert such a database into a weighted network. First we
clean the tabular data, standardizing spellings and names, and correcting any
typographical errors. A single artist or song must have a single name, and
if two artists or songs have the same name they must be differentiated, so
that there is a one-to-one mapping between artists and songs, and the names
used to identify them in the database. Next we enhance the data, detecting
and correcting factual errors as much as possible, and adding missing data
wherever possible.
After removing incomplete records, there remain 14,020 completely
documented recordings. However, multiple rows – with identical composer,
poet, and title – may correspond to the same song. These may be covers

6 All network operations and visualizations were executed using the free Pajek software package; see http://mrvar.fdv.uni-lj.si/pajek/ (Nooy

and et al.). On the advice of one of Pajek’s co-authors, Andrej Mrvar, I am using Pajek’s “hubs and authorities” 2-mode algorithm for
computing eigenvector centrality in the two-mode poet-composer network. (Batagelj and Mrvar)

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Table 1. The first 10 of 12,523 complete records, each representing a unique song recording held by Egyptian Radio.
Record

Song

Singer

Poet

Composer

1

‫حفتكرلك ايه‬

‫محمد فوزي‬

‫مصطفى عبد الرحمن‬

‫محمد فوزي‬

2

‫ادي الحياة‬

‫فايزة احمد‬

‫عمر بطيشة‬

‫محمد سلطان‬

3

‫بنت الحب‬

‫ميادة الحناوي‬

‫عمر بطيشة‬

‫خليل مصطفى‬

4

‫آخر زمن‬

‫ميادة الحناوي‬

‫سمير الطائر‬

‫محمد سلطان‬

5

‫حكاية حب‬

‫ميادة الحناوي‬

‫عصمت الحبروك‬

‫سيد مكاوي‬

6

‫ست الكل‬

‫فايدة كامل‬

‫حسين السيد‬

‫محمد الموجي‬

7

‫عيني‬

‫ميادة الحناوي‬

‫عمر بطيشة‬

‫محمد سلطان‬

8

‫فاتت سنة‬

‫ميادة الحناوي‬

‫سيد مرسي‬

‫بليغ حمدي‬

9

‫قد ايه واحشني‬

‫عادل مأمون‬

‫عبد العزيز سالم‬

‫عادل مأمون‬

10

‫يا مصر ياجنة‬

‫فاطمة علي‬

‫حيدر إمام‬

‫كامل احمد علي‬

by different singers, or different recordings by one singer, or even erroneous
multiple entries for exactly the same recording. We only want to count each
song once, regardless of how many recordings exist, whether by the same or
different singers.
We therefore run a duplicate detection algorithm, identifying groups of rows
for which song title, composer, and poet are identical, and replacing them
with a single row. After removing the duplicate rows, each of the remaining
rows in the database represents a distinct song, the output of a collaboration
between a poet and a composer (who are nearly always different people, and
contemporaries). Thus reduced, the database contains 12,523 unique songs,
the first ten of which are presented in Table 1.
Finally we can construct a preliminary bipartite “two-mode” network,
interpreting every song as a link connecting its poet and composer (singers
are not included in the analysis). Multiple links between a given poet and
composer are then replaced by a single link whose weight is equal to the
number of song collaborations connecting them. Each node’s degree then
represents the number of its collaborators (composers for poets; poets for
composers), while its weighted degree represents the number of its
collaborations (songs).

B. The full network
visualizing and counting
To visualize this network, I apply a force-directed algorithms, FruchtermanReingold, to generate a representation in three dimensions, presented in
two-dimensional projection in Figure 1. (The layout can also be viewed in
3D using the video link provided in the caption.) Poet nodes are yellow;
composer nodes are green; collaboration links are blue.)

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Figure 1. Energized full network using the Fruchterman-Reingold force-directed three-dimensional graph layout
algorithm. Poets are represented in yellow, and composers in green. What appear as numerous green isolates are in
reality green-yellow pairs: a poet and a composer who only work with each other, and thus are drawn very close
together. This is clear in a video presentation (https://vimeo.com/874538881); as the structure turns, a node may
switch from yellow to green or vice versa.

These visualizations indicate that while much of the network is connected
in a single component, there are also many smaller components. While
such visualization is important, it serves mainly to guide network analysis,
especially for larger networks, whose visual representations are hard to read
except in gross qualitative terms. The first step in that analysis is simply to
count network elements.
We find 2,332 artists (nodes), including 1,593 poets (nodes in the first
mode) and 739 composers (nodes in the second mode), linked by 5,834
collaborative relationships, of varying weights (each indicating the number of
songs produced), summing to 12,523 collaborations (songs) in total. Already,
network analysis has yielded an interesting fact (assuming that the dataset,
7
even if not complete, is not biased): there are slightly more than twice as
many poets as composers involved in producing this collection of songs. This
means that on average there are more than twice as many songs per composer
as songs per poet, i.e. the average weighted degree for composers is more than
twice the average weighted degree for poets. Further (since every collaboration
links exactly one poet and one composer) there are more than twice as many
collaborators per composer as collaborators per poet.

7 Specifically, 1593/739 or approximately 2.16.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

The average composer weighted degree is the total number of songs divided
by the number of composers, and likewise for poets. On average poets
participate in 7.86 song collaborations, as compared to 16.95 for composers,
with an average of 3.66 collaborators, as compared to 7.89 for composers.
These facts are not obvious from a simple song listing, but emerge instantly
from a network representation.
If each collaboration requires approximately the same effort from poet and
composer, this means composers are busier than poets in this world of song.
Speculating, we may turn briefly to the interpretive phase. The disparity is
perhaps understandable considering the high status of poetry in Arab society;
poets may be writing on commissions outside the world of music (though
composers may also be occupied with purely instrumental composition, this
may be less common for song composers), and are perhaps more likely than
composers to be amateurs involved in other non-poetry careers. Arab music
composers tend to be more closely integrated in the music world, also serving
as conductors and performers, and music is more likely to be a full-time
occupation for them. This explanation is but an hypothesis, yet provides
an instance of the interpretive act that must follow the purely analytical
operations of social network analysis. It would be interesting to compare
Arabic and Western popular music in this regard.

network components
Beyond such counting, it is useful to examine network connectivity. Recall
that in a single component it is possible to walk from any node to any
other, considering collaborations as links. Creative collaborations typically
necessitate intensive social interactions, often requiring communications –
messages are passed along these links. When a composer, say, collaborates with
two different poets, messages may be passed between the two poets as well,
via the composer as intermediary, and likewise for a poet working with two
different composers. In other words, we can interpret a connected network
as a social structure enabling messages to flow among its nodes, by means
of links. Extra-network information helps confirm this possibility as most
artists are Egyptian-born, and were alive in the mid-20th century. Conversely,
we cannot make such an assertion for two artist-nodes each located in a
different component, i.e. where there is no walk connecting them, even if
communication is still possible in this case. A second analytical step, then, is
to decompose the network into its disconnected pieces or components and
conduct an inventory based on size.
The full bipartite network contains 2,332 nodes in 133 components.
However, most nodes – 2,037 out of 2,332 or 87% – fall within a single large
component, indicating great potential communicative connectivity among
the vast majority of collaborating artists. Still, the network also contains
132 smaller components, ranging in size from two (dyadic collaborations) to
seven. Of these, 113 (or 86%) are dyadic (size two). There are 12 instances of
Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

size three (e.g. a poet who works with two different composers, none of them
working with anyone else, or the reverse), four of size four, two of size five,
8
and one of size seven. In some cases these small components may result from
missing data, which, if provided, would connect them to the large group. But
the fact that most nodes are contained in a large 2,037 node component, such
that a potential communicative path linking any two of them exists, is worthy
of note, and calls for further analysis and interpretation.

scale-free distributions
One aspect of the collaboration network is typical of other networks (e.g.
friendship) in large-scale urban environments: the scale-free distribution.
Plotting any of degree (collaborators), weighted degree (collaborations), or
link weights (strength of collaboration) as a histogram, we observe the “long
tail” distribution. This distribution is typical of networks that form through
so-called “preferential attachment”: nodes with many neighbors tend to be
preferred, and attract even more neighbors, because they are better connected;
thus, “the rich get richer”. This sort of distribution is called “scale free”
because it contains no characteristic “scale”; mean and median do not
represent a typical point on the distribution, unlike a normal (bell) curve, or
the distribution of human height, for example. Scale-free distributions recur
in many domains, from the distribution of wealth to the number of incoming
9
links on websites.
At the onset of any career, an artist has zero collaborations, though they
may enjoy other network connections depending on the social environment
into which they are born, including artist family members and friends.
Some artists may be “better”, in the sense of musical talent and quality,
resourcefulness, versatility, dedication, or social appeal; others may simply
be lucky. But once an artist attracts a critical mass of collaborators, they
tend to accumulate more, perhaps roughly proportional to the number they
already have, and the degree of these select individuals increases. By contrast,
most artists collaborate with far fewer and mostly just one other person. (See
Figures 2-4.)

C. The network’s structural core
So far it has been difficult to view the network’s structural core, defined
by its strongest collaborations, as that core is hidden amidst so many lowdegree nodes and low-weight links, representing weak collaborations. In order

8 A component of size 1 is not possible since artists were only included in the dataset by virtue of having collaborated on at least one song; a

component of size 6 is possible, but happens not to exist.
9 In music I have hypothesized that scale-free distributions characterize artist fame in the modern mediated era, when anyone can listen to any

artist at any time. By contrast in premodern settings, with limited travel and no possibility of mediated performance, the distribution of
artist fame should be closer to bell-shaped, with a concentration near the mean, because artists can only interact with proximate fans in live
settings. Simulations support this hypothesis. (See Frishkopf, Differentiating Traditional and Popular Music by Analyzing the Social
Structure of Fame: A Computer Simulation of Fan - Artist Affiliations)

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Figure 2. Histogram of degree (number of collaborators). The average is 5.0, maximum 142. The vast majority of
artists have fewer than four collaborators, while very few have many. This curve resembles the expected power law of
scale-free distributions (in contrast to a bell curve), and often results from a process of preferential attachment: artists
with many collaborators tend to attract more, through the network itself.

Figure 3. Histogram of weighted degree (number of collaborations). The average is 10.7, maximum 557. The same
scale-free distribution appears as in Figure 2.

Figure 4. Histogram of line weights (strength of collaborations, i.e. number of songs). The average is 2.1, and the
maximum is 114. Most collaborations are weakly productive (about 70% amount to just one song), while a few are
extremely productive.

to view the core structure we need to peel away weak collaborations in
order to see the stronger ones more clearly, via a threshold for significant
collaboration. Such a threshold is bound to be somewhat arbitrary (one
Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

of SNA’s methodological problems is determining such cutoffs), but if we
compute the 95th percentile of link weights (see Figure 4), we find that a
minimum weight of 7 (i.e. collaborations on seven songs or more) represents
the top 5% of all collaborations. Therefore, as a starting point we will
define 7 songs as the threshold for “significant collaboration”. We can then
extract what is sometimes known as the “7-slice”, comprising the subnetwork
comprising lines of weight 7 or higher only. All weaker lines are deleted, along
with any nodes that are thereby disconnected (i.e. which do not collaborate
with anyone on at least seven songs). We can then re-energize this subnetwork
in order to visualize its structure.
The 7-slice turns out to comprise 194 nodes: 113 poets, and 81 composers,
connected by 274 links. It is noteworthy that the poet to composer ratio
is lower within this more densely connected portion of the full network.
Whereas the ratio for the full network was 2.16, for the strongly connected
7-slice, it is only 1.40. At the core of the network, the activity of composers
and poets is closer to parity: collaborations per artist, and collaborators per
artist, are more equal when comparing those poets and composers who are
most active. Still there is a wide range in strength of collaborations. Link
weights range from 7 to 114 songs, with an average weight of about 15.
There are 24 components, but only one of them is large, comprising 139
artists. The remainder comprise 19 poet-composer pairs (dyads), plus a
handful of other relationships, with component sizes three, five, and six. I
present the 7-slice and its components in Figure 5.
Now that we’ve characterized the general structure of the 7-slice, we can
zoom in on its large component, and begin to address two fundamental
structural questions of social network analysis: Which artists are most central?
And where are the network’s cohesive subgroups?

centrality
Earlier I introduced five different centrality metrics: degree, weighted degree,
closeness, betweenness, and eigenvector. Applied to the artist network, the
first two evaluate centrality in terms of collaborators and collaborations,
respectively, while the latter three consider the network as a structure that
can support message-passing, identifying nodes that may play a key role in
network communications.
Every node can be evaluated according to all five measures of centrality. As
usual with SNA thresholds, the number of nodes to consider “central” is
somewhat arbitrary; we want to limit this number to locate the core of the
network, without reducing it too much, since the metrics themselves are also
somewhat arbitrary (many other centrality metrics also exist). If we identify
the dozen most central nodes in the large 7-slice component (139 nodes) for
each of the five metrics, then in theory there could be as many as 60 central
nodes,12 distinct nodes for each metric. (See Table 2.)
Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Figure 5. The 7-slice (energized using Kamada-Kawai) comprises 194 nodes, including a large component (139 nodes),
19 dyads (poet-composer pairs, at the bottom), and four other components of size 3, 5, and 6 (upper right). Again,
poets are represented in yellow, and composers in green. The following videos energize using Fruchterman-Reingold in
3D: (a) the entire 7-slice: https://vimeo.com/874539449; (b) its large component: https://vimeo.com/874539464
Table 2. The dozen most central artists in the main component of the 7-core, ranked by degree centrality. P designates poet; C designates
composer.
Rank

Name

Degree centrality

Role

1

Mohamed El Mougy

22

C

2

Abdel Fattah Mustafa

18

P

3

Abdel Azim Mohamed

15

C

4

Baligh Hamdi

14

C

5

Fathi Qura

13

P

6

Abdel Wahab Mohamed

12

P

7

Ahmed Sidqi

12

C

8

Riad Al Sunbati

11

C

9

Abdel Aziz Salam

10

P

10

Mohamed Ali Ahmed

10

P

11

Mohamed Abdel Wahab

10

C

12

Mahmoud al-Sharif

10

C

However, in practice there is heavy overlap among these five groups of 12,
resulting in a total list of only 20 central nodes: 11 composers, and 9 poets.
This is reassuring: it means that to a great extent the five centrality measures
converge. We can summarize the situation by counting how often each node
turns up in a top 12 list (ranging from 1 to all 5), and then ranking on this
count. Adding birth and death dates as metadata helps in interpreting this
data, suggesting a network of interacting contemporaries over several decades.
(See Table 3 and Figure 6.)
Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Table 3. The top 20 most central artists, according to a combination of the five centrality metrics. All are Egyptian males. Several
composers, such as Ahmed Sidqi, are rarely mentioned in music histories, but their centrality here emerges clearly. Note: ties are listed
alphabetically.
Rank

Name

# top 12 lists

Role

1

Abdel Azim Mohamed

5

C

2

Abdel Fattah Mustafa

5

P

3

Abdel Wahab Mohamed

5

P

4

Ahmed Sidqi

5

C

5

Baligh Hamdi

5

C

6

Mohamed El Mougy

5

C

7

Fathi Qura

4

P

8

Hussein Al-Sayed

4

P

9

Mohamed Abdel Wahab

4

C

10

Riad Al Sunbati

4

C

11

Mahmoud al-Sharif

3

C

12

Abdel Aziz Salam

2

P

13

Mohamed Ali Ahmed

2

P

14

Abdel Rahim Mansour

1

P

15

Abdel Rahman el-Abnudi

1

P

16

Helmy Amin

1

C

17

Hussein Junayd

1

C

18

Mohamed Fawzy

1

C

19

Mursi Gamil Aziz

1

P

20

Sayed Mekawy

1

C

Figure 6. Lifespans of the top 20 most central artists, in rank order (see Table 3). Most are contemporaries from 1940
to 1980. As their lifespans overlap heavily, they likely participated in a productive and interactive musical community,
catalyzed by the heyday of Egyptian Radio.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Table 4. The full network’s seven most productive collaborations. Social network analysis greatly facilities detection of these relationships.
Historical or cultural analysis can then attempt to explain them. Only three individuals (indicated with an asterisk) do not appear in the
centrality list (Table 3).
Rank

Poet

Composer

Collaborations (link weight)

1

Hussein Al-Sayed

Mohamed Abdel Wahab

114

2

Abdel Fattah Mustafa

Ahmed Sidqi

66

3

Mursi Gamil Aziz

Mohamed El Mougy

63

4

Mohamed Hamza*

Baligh Hamdi

63

5

Abdel Rahim Mansour

Baligh Hamdi

62

6

Abdel Wahab Mohamed

Baligh Hamdi

62

7

Abdel Salam Amin*

Ammar El Sherei*

61

The number of composers and poets in the final centrality list are roughly
equal. All are Egyptian and male, and the top six (four composers and
two poets) are equally ranked, as are the following four (two poets, and
two composers). From the metadata we observe that the lifespans of these
most central 20 artists overlap heavily, meaning they could participate in a
productive interwoven community. Of the top six composers, four (Baligh
Hamdy, Mohamed El Mougy, Mohamed Abdel Wahab, and Riad al-Sunbati)
are widely known in English-language music histories, but two others (Abdel
Azim Mohamed and Ahmed Sidqi) are rarely mentioned. Why? While an
historical inquiry beyond SNA is required in order to reveal the reasons,
systematic network analysis has here proven its worth by revealing their
importance and posing the question. As for poets, very few are discussed
in English language sources, and identifying them constitutes an important
contribution to Egyptian music history. Other questions are also raised. For
instance, one may ask about the reasons for the the striking absence of central
females as poets or composers, despite the large number of female singers.
Is it due to a male bias in Egyptian radio holdings? Or due to broader
social factors discouraging women from these roles? Network analysis doesn’t
provide all the answers, but can help to guide historical research in productive
directions.

cohesion
Now let us consider cohesive subgroups (Wasserman and Faust, ch. 7). There
are several ways to define these tightly connected groups of nodes. One
may examine the most productive dyadic collaborations, or one may search
for highly connected clusters. Link weight provides the former, while the
latter may be revealed through several popular cluster detection algorithms,
including (1) isolating components in higher K-slices (for K > 7); (2)
detecting bipartite cliques, or (3) detecting communities.
Table 4 displays the most productive seven collaborations in the full network,
representing the top 2.5% of all link weights. This list emerges immediately
from network analysis, though it is hidden in the tabular data. While all
the poets are different, one composer stands out as central to productive
Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Figure 7. The 21-slice, with link weights indicated. The most productive collaboration (114 songs), between Mohamed
Abdel Wahab and Hussein Al-Sayed, is highlighted in red. Historical or ethnographic research may explain why these
particular groupings are salient.

collaborations: Baligh Hamdi, responsible for three of the links. There are 12
names altogether—seven poets and five composers—of which all but three
(indicated with an asterisk) also appear on the centrality list (Table 3). Most
striking is the collaboration between the famous composer Mohamed Abdel
Wahab and poet Hussein Al-Sayed, with nearly twice as many collaborations
as any other pair. Such an analysis once again demonstrates the power of SNA
to highlight key figures and relationships, all of which can then be further
explored and interpreted through more conventional qualitative historical or
ethnographic research.
Honing in further on the most cohesive sections of the network, we can
extract the 21-slice, and examine its components. Figure 7 indicates the
structure, with link weights added. The structure thus revealed, other more
qualitative methods of social science can be applied to explain them.
Another way to locate cohesive subgroups is to search for bipartite cliques.
A clique is a fully connected subset of nodes. Thus a dyad is a clique of
two, and a closed triad is a clique of three. A clique of four is a square
with diagonals added. For two-mode (bipartite) networks, where links cannot
connect within but only between modes, no cliques exist beyond the dyad.
Therefore, a bipartite clique is defined as a subset in which every node in the
first mode is connected to every node in the second; this subset is maximally
connected within the bipartite network. For instance, Figure 8 represents a
bipartite clique: four composers and four poets, with every possible poetcomposer pair connected.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Figure 8. A bipartite clique on 8 nodes, 4 poets and 4 composers.

We can search for instances of such a structure throughout the larger
network, counting the number of Figure 8-type cliques in which each
network node is a member, in order to highlight cohesive subgroups.
Searching detects three instances; the result is shown in Figure 9, where red
nodes are members of all three cliques, green nodes are members of two,
and yellow nodes are members of just one (nodes that are not members
of any bipartite clique are removed). Energizing (using Kamada Kawai),
the red nodes move to the center, and yellow nodes to the periphery. The
analysis highlights the centrality of poet Abdel Fattah Mustafa and composer
Mohamed El Mougy, who together link the two halves of this tightly
connected web
Finally, we may also experiment with community detection algorithms, of
which several are widely used. Informally, a community is a group of nodes
that are densely connected to each other, but only sparsely connected to the
rest of the network. We define a community partition as an assignment of
every node to exactly one community (with this definition, communities do
not overlap). The modularity of that assignment is defined as the fraction
of all links that connect two nodes assigned to the same community (as
opposed to connecting two nodes assigned to different communities), minus
the expected such fraction in a random network with the same node degrees
(since some links will fall within a single community even for a random
network). Community detection algorithms attempt to assign nodes to
communities such that modularity is maximized. In this way they help to
reveal highly connected groups of nodes within the network.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Figure 9. Searching for the bipartite clique illustrated in Figure 8, we find three instances. Here color does not indicate
role. Rather, red nodes are members of all three instances, green nodes are members of two, and yellow nodes are
members of just one. One poet and one composer (red nodes) play critical brokering roles, linking two halves of this
network. (Poets are indicated with the suffix P; composers with C.)

Figure 10. Results of Louvain community detection algorithm. To some extent these communities differentiate
musical eras of the 20th century: early (green), mid (red), and later (yellow). But there also appear to be stylistic
implications. (Poets are indicated with the suffix P; composers with C.)

Figure 10 shows the results of the Louvain community detection algorithm
(Blondel et al.), applied to the large component of the 18-slice. Three
communities have been circumscribed, with modularity 87%. Subsequent
interpretation is required, based on metadata (such as date, or style), and
contextual factors. To some extent these communities differentiate musical
eras of the 20th century: early (green), mid (red), and later (yellow). But there
also appear to be stylistic implications. More interpretive work is required.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

III. Concluding remarks
Thus network analysis of a simple song database has highlighted important
individuals, collaborative relationships, and cohesive subgroups, raising many
important questions for further analysis and interpretation that would not
otherwise even have been asked. I reiterate that social network analysis alone
cannot answer many of the questions it raises. Rather, it is useful for drawing
an empirically-grounded, big data, relational picture, and highlighting key
features, structures, and relationships, to become focal points for subsequent
historical or ethnographic inquiry. Applying social network analysis also
means that the pitfalls of narrative histories – lack of big data, and lack
of relational data – are avoided, because big relational data is required to
perform social network analysis.
More practically, the application of social network analysis outlined in this
article illustrates a general methodology for handling widely available
collaboration data of this type, whether in music or any other domain,
in three phases, which may be summarized as follows. First, gather and
clean collaboration data, and assemble it as a network. Next, apply SNA
to highlight features and relational structures that would otherwise remain
invisible, such as lists of the most central nodes, the most important
collaborations, or the most tightly connected subgroups. Finally, interpret
these features and structures in light of broader socio-cultural and historical
factors, in an attempt to explain why certain figures are central, or why certain
subgroups are tightly connected. These interpretations may suggest further
data-gathering and network analysis, forming a cycle of empirical research,
network analysis, and interpretation.
In sum, the qualitative, critical interpretive methods of humanistic research
and the quantitative, computational methods of social network analysis are
not mutually exclusive, much less incompatible. Rather they blend
harmoniously in music history, each complementing and guiding the other.
If the methodological balance formerly tilted toward the former, perhaps the
recent availability of big data and SNA tools, along with greater acceptance
of digital humanities among music scholars, will help restore equilibrium,
enriching our understanding of music history in the process.
Data repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/8QYNVS
Submitted: February 05, 2024 EDT, Accepted: March 21, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

works cited
Abdallah, Samer, et al. “The Digital Music Lab: A Big Data Infrastructure for Digital Musicology.”
Journal on Computing and Cultural Heritage, vol. 10, no. 1, Jan. 2017, pp. 1–21. ACM Digital
Library, https://doi.org/10.1145/2983918.
Barabasi, Albert-Laszlo. Linked: How Everything Is Connected to Everything Else and What It
Means. Plume, 2003.
---. Network Science. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
Batagelj, Vladimir, and Andrej Mrvar. Pajek Reference Manual. 2011, http://vlado.fmf.uni-lj.si/
pub/networks/pajek/doc/pajekman.pdf.
Biggs, Norman Linstead, et al. Graph Theory 1736-1936. Clarendon Press, https://doi.org/10.1039/
jr9360001736.
Blondel, Vincent D., et al. “Fast Unfolding of Communities in Large Networks.” Journal of
Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, vol. 2008, no. 10, Oct. 2008, p. P10008,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008.
Borgatti, Stephen P., and Martin G. Everett. “Network Analysis of 2-Mode Data.” Social Networks,
vol. 19, no. 3, Aug. 1997, pp. 243–69. ScienceDirect, https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0378-8733(96)00301-2.
Boyd, Douglas A. Egyptian Radio: Tool of Political and National Development. Association for
Education in Journalism, 1977.
Brinner, Benjamin Elon. Playing across a Divide: Israeli-Palestinian Musical Encounters. Oxford
University Press, 2009. Open WorldCat, https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/
9780195395945.001.0001.
Bryan, Nicholas J., and Ge Wang. Musical Influence Network Analysis And Rank Of Sample-Based
Music. 2011.
Castelo-Branco, Salwa El-Shawan. “Radio and Musical Life in Egypt.” Revista de Musicología, vol.
16, no. 3, 1993, pp. 1229–39. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/20795978.
Christakis, Nicholas A., and James H. Fowler. Connected: The Surprising Power of Our Social
Networks and How They Shape Our Lives -- How Your Friends’ Friends’ Friends Affect Everything
You Feel, Think, and Do. Reprint, Back Bay Books, 2011.
Clercq, Trevor de. “Big Data, Big Questions: A Closer Look at the Yale–Classical Archives Corpus
(c. 2015).” Empirical Musicology Review, vol. 11, no. 1, July 2016, pp. 59–67, https://doi.org/
10.18061/emr.v11i1.5274.
Cottrell, Stephen. “Big Music Data, Musicology, and the Study of Recorded Music: Three Case
Studies.” The Musical Quarterly, vol. 101, no. 2–3, Mar. 2019, pp. 216–43, https://doi.org/
10.1093/musqtl/gdy013.
Crossley, Nick. “Music Worlds and Event Networks: An Exposition.” Cultural Sociology, July 2023,
p. 17499755231180182, https://doi.org/10.1177/17499755231180182.
---. Networks of Sound, Style and Subversion: The Punk and Post-Punk Worlds of Manchester,
London, Liverpool and Sheffield, 1975-80. 2015. Open WorldCat, https://search.ebscohost.com/
login.aspx?direct=true&scope=site&db=nlebk&db=nlabk&AN=1131176.
---. Social Networks and Music Worlds. Routledge, 2015.
Crossley, Nick, and Tugba Aydin Ozturk. “Music, Social Structure and Connection: Exploring and
Explaining Core-Periphery Structure in a Two-Mode Network of Music Festivals and Artists in
Turkey.” Miscellanea Anthropologica et Sociologica, vol. 20, no. 2, Nov. 2019, pp. 192–210.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Danielson, Virginia. The Voice of Egypt : Umm Kulthum, Arabic Song, and Egyptian Society in the
Twentieth Century. University of Chicago Press, 1997, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/
9780226136080.001.0001.
Darwish, Hasan Sayyid. Sayyid Darwish bayna al-ʿAbqariyya wa-l-Muʾamirat al-Fanniyya. AlṬabʻah 1, Dar al-Ahmadi li-l-Nashr, 2000.
El-Shawan, Salwa. “The Socio-Political Context of al-Musika al-ʿarabiyyah in Cairo, Egypt: Policies,
Patronage, Institutions, and Musical Change (1927-77).” Asian Music, vol. 12, no. 1, 1980, pp.
86–128, https://doi.org/10.2307/833799.
---. “Western Music and Its Practitioners in Egypt (ca. 1825-1985): The Integration of a New
Musical Tradition in a Changing Environment.” Asian Music, vol. 17, no. 1, 1985, pp. 143–53.
Fahmy, Ziad. “Early Egyptian Radio: Transitioning from Media-Capitalism to Media-Etatism,
1928–1934.” Middle East Journal of Culture and Communication, vol. 15, no. 1–2, 2022, pp.
92–112, https://doi.org/10.1163/18739865-01501005.
Feynman, Richard P. The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1963, http://
www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu/.
Freeman, Linton C. “Centrality in Social Networks Conceptual Clarification.” Social Networks, vol.
1, no. 3, Jan. 1978, pp. 215–39. ScienceDirect, https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-8733(78)90021-7.
---. The Development of Social Network Analysis: A Study in the Sociology of Science. Empirical Press;
BookSurge, 2004.
Frishkopf, Michael. Differentiating Traditional and Popular Music by Analyzing the Social
Structure of Fame: A Computer Simulation of Fan - Artist Affiliations. 2013, https://
drive.google.com/file/d/1yZ-bUWFuvcTZsyj-YYTWkl4RXgfXPhvL/view.
---, editor. Music and Media in the Arab World. The American University in Cairo Press, 2010.
---. “Music for Global Human Development: Participatory Action Research for Health and
Wellbeing.” MUSICultures, vol. 49, 2022, pp. 71–109.
---. “Nationalism, Nationalization, and the Egyptian Music Industry: Muhammad Fawzy,
Misrphon, and Sawt al-Qahira (SonoCairo).” Asian Music, vol. 39, no. 2, July 2008, pp. 28–58.
Fruchterman, T. M. J., and E. M. Reingold. “Graph Drawing by Force-Directed Placement.”
Software: Practice and Experience, vol. 21, no. 11, Jan. 1991, pp. 1129–64, https://doi.org/
10.1002/spe.4380211102.
Giannetti, Francesca. “A Review of Network Approaches in Music Studies.” Music Reference
Services Quarterly, vol. 19, no. 2, Apr. 2016, pp. 156–63. Taylor and Francis+NEJM,
https://doi.org/10.1080/10588167.2016.1166842.
Gienapp, Lukas, et al. “Topological Properties of Music Collaboration Networks: The Case of Jazz
and Hip Hop.” DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly, Jan. 2021, p. N.PAG, https://
openurl.ebsco.com/contentitem/
gcd:149414414?sid=ebsco:plink:crawler&id=ebsco:gcd:149414414.
Gómez, Emilia, et al. “Computational Ethnomusicology: Perspectives and Challenges.” Journal of
New Music Research, vol. 42, no. 2, June 2013, pp. 111–12. Taylor and Francis+NEJM,
https://doi.org/10.1080/09298215.2013.818038.
Kamada, T., and S. Kawai. “An Algorithm for Drawing General Undirected Graphs.” Information
Processing Letters, vol. 31, no. 1, Apr. 1989, pp. 7–15. EBSCOhost, https://doi.org/10.1016/
0020-0190(89)90102-6.
Kent-Muller, Anna. “Big Musicology: A Framework for Transformation.” Digital Libraries for
Musicology, 2017.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

Kobourov, Stephen G. “Force-Directed Drawing Algorithms.” Handbook of Graph Drawing and
Visualization, edited by Roberto Tamassia, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2014, pp.
383–408.
Kossinets, Gueorgi. “Effects of Missing Data in Social Networks.” Social Networks, vol. 28, no. 3,
July 2006, pp. 247–68. ScienceDirect, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2005.07.002.
Kramer, Lawrence. “Musicology and Meaning.” The Musical Times, vol. 144, no. 1883, 2003, pp.
6–12, https://doi.org/10.2307/3650677.
Krause, Robert W., et al. “Missing Network Data A Comparison of Different Imputation
Methods.” 2018 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis
and Mining (ASONAM), IEEE Xplore, 2018, pp. 159–63, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ASONAM.2018.8508716.
Lagrange, Frédéric. Musiciens et poètes en Égypte au temps de la Nahda. 1994. Paris 8, PhD
Dissertation.
Locke, Ralph P. “Constructing the Oriental ‘Other’: Saint-Saëns’s ‘Samson et Dalila.’” Cambridge
Opera Journal, vol. 3, no. 3, 1991, pp. 261–302, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954586700003530.
Malm, Krister. “Music on the Move: Traditions and Mass Media.” Ethnomusicology, vol. 37, no. 3,
Oct. 1993, pp. 339–52. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/851718.
McAndrew, Siobhan, and Martin Everett. “Music as Collective Invention: A Social Network
Analysis of Composers.” Cultural Sociology, vol. 9, no. 1, Mar. 2015, pp. 56–80. SAGE Journals,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1749975514542486.
Moreno, J. L. “Sociometry in Relation to Other Social Sciences.” Sociometry, vol. 1, no. 1/2, 1937,
pp. 206–19. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/2785266.
Mursī, Ṣāliḥ. Laylā Murād. Dār al-Hilāl, 1416.
Najmi, Kamal. Turath al-Ghinaʾ al-ʿArabi: bayna al-Mawsili wa Ziryab wa Umm Kulthum wa
ʿAbd al-Wahhab. Al-Ṭabʻah 1, Dar al-Shuruq, 1993.
Newman, Mark. Networks: An Introduction. 1st ed., Oxford University Press, 2010.
Nooy, Wouter de and et al. Exploratory Social Network Analysis with Pajek. Third edition,
Cambridge University Press, 2018. Open WorldCat, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108565691.
Ortega, José Luis. “Cover Versions as an Impact Indicator in Popular Music: A Quantitative
Network Analysis.” PLOS ONE, vol. 16, no. 4, Apr. 2021, p. e0250212. PLoS Journals,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0250212.
O’Shea, Susan. The Art Worlds of Punk-Inspired Feminist Networks - a Social Network Analysis of
the Ladyfest Feminist Music and Cultural Movement in the UK. 2014. The University of
Manchester (United Kingdom), Ph.D. ProQuest, https://www.proquest.com/docview/
1780282051/abstract/6A8AD087204C45D5PQ/1.
Ozment, Elizabeth Whittenburg. “The Sociology of Musical Networks.” International Sociology,
vol. 30, no. 5, Sept. 2015, pp. 448–56. SAGE Journals, https://doi.org/10.1177/
0268580915597184.
Park, Juyong, et al. “The Social Network of Contemporary Popular Musicians.” International
Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos - IJBC, vol. 17, Oct. 2006, https://doi.org/10.1142/
S0218127407018385.
Qureshi, Regula Burckhardt. Music and Marx. Routledge, 2015.
Racy, Ali Jihad. “Music in Nineteenth-Century Egypt: An Historical Sketch.” Selected Reports in
Ethnomusicology, vol. 4, 1985, pp. 157–79.
---. Musical Change and Commercial Recording in Egypt, 1904-1932. 1977. University of Illinois,
PhD dissertation.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

Poet-Composer Collaborations in Modern Egyptian Song: A Social Network Analysis Approach to Music History

---. “Record Industry and Egyptian Traditional Music: 1904-1932.” Ethnomusicology, vol. 20, no. 1,
1976, pp. 23–48, https://doi.org/10.2307/850819.
---. “Sound and Society: The Takht Music of Early-Twentieth Century Cairo.” Selected Reports in
Ethnomusicology, vol. 7, 1988, pp. 139–70.
---. “The Waslah: A Compound-Form Principle in Egyptian Music.” Arab Studies Quarterly, vol. 5,
no. 4, 1983, pp. 396–403.
Rehding, Alexander. “Ecomusicology between Apocalypse and Nostalgia.” Journal of the American
Musicological Society, vol. 64, no. 2, 2011, pp. 409–14, https://doi.org/10.1525/
jams.2011.64.2.409.
Rose, Stephen, et al. “Writing a Big Data History of Music.” Early Music, vol. 43, no. 4, Nov. 2015,
pp. 649–60. Silverchair, https://doi.org/10.1093/em/cav071.
Sahab, Victor. Al-Sabʿa al-Kubār Fi al-Mūsiqā al-ʿArabiyya al-Muʿāṣira (The Seven Greats of
Contemporary Arabic Music). Dār al-ʻIlm lil-Malāyīn, 1987.
Scott, John. Social Network Analysis: A Handbook. SAGE Publications, 2000.
Small, Christopher. Musicking : The Meanings of Performing and Listening. University Press of
New England, 1998.
Solie, Ruth A. Musicology and Difference: Gender and Sexuality in Music Scholarship. University of
California Press, 1995. Open WorldCat, http://hdl.handle.net/2027/heb.06281.
Urberg, Michelle. “Pasts and Futures of Digital Humanities in Musicology: Moving Towards a
‘Bigger Tent.’” Music Reference Services Quarterly, vol. 20, no. 3–4, Oct. 2017, pp. 134–50.
Taylor and Francis+NEJM, https://doi.org/10.1080/10588167.2017.1404301.
Wasserman, Stanley, and Katherine Faust. Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications. 1st
ed., Cambridge University Press, 1994, https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511815478.
Watts, Duncan J. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age. W. W. Norton & Company, 2004.
Weyde, Tillman, et al. “Big Data for Musicology.” Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on
Digital Libraries for Musicology, Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, pp. 1–3,
https://doi.org/10.1145/2660168.2660187.
Wilson, Robin J. Introduction to Graph Theory. 2015.
Zaki, ʿAbd al-Hamid Tawfik. al-Muʿasirun min Rawwad al-Musiqa al-ʿArabiyya. al-Hayʾa alMisriyya al-ʿAmma li-l-Kitab, 1993.
---. Aʿlam al-Musiqa al-Misriyya ʿabr 150 sana. al-Hayʾa al-Misriyya al-ʿAmma li-l-Kitab, 1990.
Zhang, Xiaowei, et al. “A Study of Music Genres Based on Social Networks and Statistical
Methods.” 2023 4th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Human-Computer
Interaction (ICHCI), IEEE Xplore, 2023, pp. 366–71, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICHCI58871.2023.10277839.
Zuhur, Sherifa. Asmahan’s Secrets : Woman, War and Song. Center for Middle Eastern Studies,
University of Texas at Austin, 2000.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

