Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of
Guideline No. 6
Natalie M. Houston
01.15.20
Article DOI: 10.22148/001c.11774
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Natalie M. Houston, “Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of Guideline
No. 6,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. January 15, 2020. doi: 10.22148/001c.11774
The framing of Guideline VI within the pedagogical situation of a class on “Digital Methods in Literary Studies” is helpful in pointing out some of the ways in
which the theory and practice of annotation can serve students of literature, as
well as eventually contributing to computational analysis. Above all, annotation
necessitates firm decisions, as the authors describe: ”Rather than let an ambiguous text stay ambiguous, they simply had to decide for one option in order to
be able to annotate a passage and had to justify their choice with reference to
the whole text or to adapt the guidelines in order to address and document the
ambiguity” (3). This remark highlights the challenge in developing annotation
guidelines so that they can be used consistently by different communities of users
without modifications. The authors note several points of debate within the class
that are relevant to the overall shared task and its evaluation: the feasibility of developing annotation guidelines that could be applied to a wide range of literary
texts; the involved levels of textual interpretation that some kinds of annotation
require; and the effect of prior study or knowledge on an annotator’s ability to discern or interpret narrative levels. As the shared task proceeds, it may be necessary
to specify the applicability of the annotation guidelines to works from particular
genres, time periods, or languages.
This guideline usefully deploys key concepts from narratological theory, including Genette’s outline of narrative levels and types of narrators, Ryan’s focus on
the illocutionary and ontological boundaries, and Nelles’s notion of the narratee.
1

Natalie M. Houston<

Cultural Analytics

Translating these theories into an outline of annotation choices is useful. But the
textual examples that are provided are not sufficiently explained, and so do not
adequately serve to guide a user’s potential application of these categories to another text. Although Shelley’s Frankenstein is a well-known novel, it presents
several levels of narratological complexity that ought to be better explained if it
is to be used as an exemplar. To readers who have not spent weeks immersed in
the task of annotating Frankenstein, many of these examples of level change or
narrator change will not be clear.
In particular, the following aspects of this Guideline could be revised for greater
clarity and applicability:
(1) The authors state that they decided to annotate “the point between two different narrative levels,” yet the examples show the use of paired tags around sections
of the narrative, which seems to contradict this statement.
(2) Some of the examples are drawn from Frankenstein, and others appear to be
invented examples. The sources and selection of example texts should be clearly
identified and explained.
(3) The examples are presented together as a block paragraph that often suggests
they are taken sequentially from the novel, when in fact they are not. (i.e., #3
Narrator Change presents extracts from chapter 11 and then chapter 9). What
are the closing tags closing? This formatting error can lead a reader unfamiliar
with Shelley’s novel to think all this text comes from one sequence in the novel.
(4) Most of the examples taken from Frankenstein are drawn from the opening
lines of chapters or letters presented within chapters. No discussion is offered
in the Guideline about whether or how particular attention ought to be paid to
chapter or section boundaries in the literary text.
This Guideline also raises a theoretical point that ought to be considered in the
shared task. The authors raise the question about the mediation of embedded
narratives when they discuss whether the Creature should be considered the narrator of its own story, which is doubly mediated by other narrators in the novel
Frankenstein. Many nineteenth-century novels, such as The Moonstone and Dracula, deliberately exploit textual mediation by presenting documents or letters that
are ostensibly transcribed or read aloud by other characters. Whether such mediations constitute a form of narrative level or not should be considered in the
annotation guidelines.

2

Cultural Analytics

Review of Guideline No. 6

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

3

