Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of
Guideline No. 8
Tom McEnaney
01.15.20
Article DOI: 10.22148/001c.11776
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Tom McEnaney, “Annotating Narrative Levels: Review of Guideline No. 8,”
Journal of Cultural Analytics. January 15, 2020. doi: 10.22148/001c.11776
“Let me tell you a story.” The proposed guidelines suggest that this phrase serve
as the heuristic that readers supply at the beginning of any possible embedded
narrative to identify a shift in narrative frames or levels. (The difference between
“frame” and “level,” although perhaps confusing in the history of narratology,
does not seem like an important distinction at this stage of the project.) This
simple phrase, the author suggests, can replace a field of narrative theory they
feel would “simply confuse my student annotators.” However simple the phrase
might seem, however, it, in fact, conceals a number of key narratological issues:
focalization, temporal indices, diction / register, person, fictional paratexts, duration, and, no doubt, others. The question for the guidelines is whether one
can leapfrog the particularity of these issues if students use the above phrase to
annotate texts with XML tags and produce operational scripts that identify the
nested narratives. As it currently stands, students seem capable of learning the
basic idea of nested narratives and tagging changes in narrative frames, but there
are no real results to confirm the project’s success, as the author reports they are
not yet able to confirm any inter-annotation agreement.
How does one “identif[y] moments where one narrative yields to another”?
We might have an intuitive sense of this change, or we might see obvious diacritical markers (new sets of quotation marks, for instance), but teaching the
machine would seem to require more specific categories. Certain classic narratological keywords (“story” vs “discourse”) and debates (“Narrate or Describe?”)
1

Tom McEnaney<

Cultural Analytics

might play a part in teaching what is at stake in these narrative shifts, but they
do not seem necessary to identify changes in narrative footing. On the other
hand, the key categories mentioned in the first paragraph seem useful for writing
a program that would include a robust sense of narrative theory. For instance, a
reader might notice a change in person (first, second, third, singular or plural),
or a character name. Or a reader might realize that while the previous narrative
was told in the present tense, the next strip of discourse appears in the imperfect.
Additionally, there might not be any change in person or tense, but a new register might take over the text. All of these concepts might fall under the umbrella
term of “focalization,” and, if the author of the proposed guidelines does indeed
have a sturdy model for sorting moments of free indirect discourse, as they suggest in the proposal, perhaps that script could address these issues. But what if
a change in person and / or tense and / or register occurs for only a sentence or
two in the course of a dialogue between two characters. Is this a new narrative?
Duration, the number of words that pertain to a shift in person and / or tense,
seems like a relevant concept to help in classification, as well. Lastly, how would
such a classifier independently account for fictional paratexts such as epistolary
introductions, fictional prefaces, or other frames that might not differ in person,
diction, or tense? Can we limit the search to just one or a few of these key categories and still write a script that successfully identifies the transition from one
narrative frame to another?
Operationalizing these issues would seem necessary in order to fulfill the
author’s proposal to find a “use beyond the classroom” for these guidelines. On
the other hand, the guidelines do seem useful as a pedagogical assignment to
draw attention to issues of focalization and other key features of narrative for students confused by the jargon of narrative theory or unconvinced or unexcited by
non-operational hand annotation (i.e. circling moments where they’ve identified
a change in narrative frame). Moreover, the proposed assignment seems like an
excellent introduction to the very idea and process of operationalizing literary
concepts.
In a classic of popular narratology, Umberto Eco’s Six Walks in the Narrative
Woods (delivered as the 1992-1993 Norton Lectures at Harvard), Eco repeatedly
turns to the 19th century French writer Gérard de Nerval’s Sylvie to explain his
theory of nested narratives, the differences between an “author,” “model author”
and “narrator,” and the temporal problems that arise alongside or at an intersection with these categories. Citing Bal, Barthes, Booth, Chatman, Cohn, Genette,
Greimas, Ricoeur, Todorov, and White, Eco concludes that “a text is a lazy machine that demands the reader do part of its work.” Can the proposed guidelines
make a more active and flexible machine? A machine that will easily identify
2

Cultural Analytics

Review of Guideline No. 8

shifts in narrative levels or frames? And will the results help readers to attend
to the meaningfulness of these changes in perspective, acting alongside one machine reading another? The proposal’s success will depend on whether it can
answer these questions positively.

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

3

