Torres-Cacoullos, Anna, and Elizaveta Senatorova. “A Digital Archaeology of Early
Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader.” Journal of Cultural
Analytics, vol. 9, no. 4, July 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.118152.

ARTICLE

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines
and the Male Fan Reader
Anna Torres-Cacoullos1 , Elizaveta Senatorova2
1 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2 Columbia University

Keywords: Movie fandom, male movie fans, film magazines, fan mail, photo contests, silent film period, Popular Film, Spain, Spanish, mixed methods framework
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.118152

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 4, 2024

As a sociologically-oriented study, this project contributes to an archaeology of
cinema fandom broadly, and early Spanish fan culture specifically, by
spotlighting male readers of popular film magazines. Taking as an exploratory
case study reader interactivity with the magazine Popular Film, analysis of
correspondence and published photos of readers participating in reader contests
demonstrates that the magazine’s cinema fan base was composed of a strikingly
large proportion of readers who were male and that these were ardent
enthusiasts of celebrity consumer culture. This is a notable contradistinction to
the widely-held idea of the star-struck female movie fan. Methodologically, in
conducting this study we reflect on the challenges of digital approaches to
historical periodical research, where particular challenges are posed when
working with magazines in a non-anglophone language, and when there are few
baseline studies to rely on to guide and contextualize patterns picked up
through strictly macro methods. We advocate for the affordances of a mixed
macro-micro approach that combines distant reading with traditional textual
studies of close reading. By adopting such a hybrid framework, digital methods
provide new opportunities towards reconstructing profiles of magazine
readerships and to unearth evidence of male movie fans in Spain.

Introduction: A New Perspective on Early Cinema Readers
In issue no. 124 (13 December 1928) of Barcelona’s film magazine Popular
Film, a periodical which would go on to become one of the most influential
cinema magazines in 1930s Spain (Alberich et al. 455), a headlining article
about Hollywood’s Latin lover Ramón Novarro began with the author’s
rejection of such frivolous considerations as the actor’s physical beauty:
If I were eighteen years old, had long hair, short ideas and even
shorter skirts, maybe the beauty of the famous Mexican actor
would interest me. With my short hair, with the urgent need I
have to shave every day, with the elephant-leg pants I wear and
with the ideas that come to my mind, I couldn’t care less about
the manly poise of Ramón Novarro. […] How does Ramón
Novarro comb his hair? For me, to be honest, he can part his

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

hair in the middle, I wouldn’t notice and it shouldn’t worry me
in the slightest. But for you, most beautiful reader, things are
1
different. (Pego 3)
Using the grammatically feminine-marked form of ‘reader’/lector, Aurelio
Pego, the article’s author, characterizes Novarro’s fan base, and by extension,
the magazine’s readers, as an adolescent young woman of intellectual shortsightedness interested only in silly things like how movie stars do their hair.
Whereas female fan behavior is belittled as gossip and a preoccupation with
beauty and fashion, the author’s remarks gesture to the male counterpart
as a movie fan disinterested in the personal lives of cinema’s movie stars or
Hollywood gossip.
In reality, a systematic survey of popular Spanish film magazines reveals
Spain’s early cinema fan base was composed of a strikingly large proportion
2
of male readers. In fact, in the years leading up to the introduction of
sound film in 1929, male readers avidly read and persistently engaged with
popular film magazines through two central modes of interactivity: fan mail
and participation in reader contests, particularly the star-search photo contest.
Through their inquiries to magazine editors and their expressive photographs,
male readers exhibited attentiveness to the sorts of things that Pego attributed
to a silly ‘screen-struck girl’—the personal lives of movie stars and where to
write to them—and displayed hobbyist dispositions and creative effort as avid
movie fans, knowledgeable about the style of movie stars. As the present
study demonstrates, male readers from all over Spain, across geographical
regions and social classes, were remarkably invested in celebrity consumer
culture, revealing that they were not disinterested spectators of cinema but
devoted cinema culture readers.
3

In the burgeoning body of research on the early movie fan, studies of the
cultural history of cinema have charted the progressive feminization of movie
fandom in the silent period and have traced the rise of the archetype of
the ‘screen-struck girl,’ a young female movie spectator overinvolved in her
film enthusiasm and feverish in her longing for stardom. Yet few scholars
have considered the male cinephile, though many have been careful to note
that early movie fandom was never a distinctly female practice. Male movie
fans of the silent film period have largely gone unaccounted for, under the
assumption that they denigrated or had little interest in cinema culture
(Fuller-Seeley 118). This rings true in the case of Spain, where “masculinist

1 This and all subsequent translations are our own.
2 This project was made possible by an ACLS/DRIVE Postdoctoral Fellowship in Humanities-Based Data Studies and Digital/Social

Transformation at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (2020-2022) awarded to Anna Torres-Cacoullos. A special note of thanks
to the Filmoteca de Catalunya for access to the archive in Barcelona, and to the graduate student assistants involved in various stages of this
project, including Morgan Lundy for helping jumpstart the digital exploration of Spanish magazines, Lázaro García Angulo for astute
readings and invigorating discussions and, above all, Liza Senatorova.
3 See, for example, Kathryn Fuller-Seeley (1996); Shelley Stamp (2000); and Diana Anselmo-Sequeira (2015).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

elitism” has traditionally defined the cultural and literary canon (Zubiaurre
and Kurtz 108), aligning men with the nation’s high cultural repository
and to the roles of intellectuals and literary or film critics only interested in
aesthetic debates, and not as fans eager to participate in mass cultural celebrity
consumer culture, for example.
To our knowledge, a sustained analysis of early male movie fans and their
fan practices, in any national context, has been provided only by Courtney
Andree (2014), in her consideration of the United States silent film era
context. Pertaining to Spain, we have been unable to identify any case studies
pertaining to men, either as film fans or, by extension, as consumers of
popular film magazines in the silent period, or which offer any demographic
data on early film magazine readership more generally. As film magazine
readers were necessarily also film viewers, this lacuna in film audience research
parallels digital approaches to the study of Hispanic new cinema histories, still
underutilized, despite the growing body of digital humanities projects that
have turned to computational methods to study, for example, the history of
moviegoing, exhibition and distribution in New England during the 1920s
(Klenotic 2011), the circulation of silent-era film periodicals (Hoyt 2014),
and the ways online databases may shape the study of historical film cultures
in the Netherlands (Noordegraaf et al. 2018).
This project contributes to an archeology of cinema fandom broadly, and
fan culture in Spain specifically, by spotlighting male film fan readers during
the silent film period. We take as a case study fan interactivity with Popular
Film, during the magazine’s first three-year period, before the onset of sound
cinema, and encompassing 175 issues. The term ‘cinema fandom’ is here
understood as a social phenomenon encompassing participatory reception
practices—of both creative and critical dimensions—characterized by a love
for the movies among mainstream audiences (as opposed to elite, intellectual
circles). We characterize Popular Film as a ‘fan magazine’ in that it elicited
and received interaction and participation from readers who identified
themselves as, or the magazine itself identified as, film ‘fans’—variously
referred to in Spain as “admirers,” “aficionados,” or “lovers of cinema.”
To complement hundreds of hours of close reading, this project turns to
digital methods—text mining, topic modeling, data processing and data
visualization, GIS mapping, and network analysis. In so doing, we reflect on
and highlight the need for a ‘toggling’ mixed methods interpretive framework
using close and distant reading when conducting digital periodical research,
where particular challenges are posed when working with periodicals in a
non-anglophone written language, and when there are few studies to rely on
to help guide and contextualize the patterns picked up through strictly macro
methods. Ultimately, close reading that is augmented by computational
evidence allows us to amplify our understanding of Spain’s cinema audiences

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

and magazine readers and enables us to “[…] ground quantitative
generalizations in concrete particulars of micro-historical case studies of local
situations” (Maltby and Stokes 21).
Turning to an investigation of the two central participatory exercises of the
fan magazine Popular Film—that is, the fan mail section and the reader starsearch photo contest, this is the first study, to our knowledge, to unearth
demographic data on readers of Spanish film magazines, and the second
to provide a sustained consideration of early male film fans (in Spain, and
4
in any national context). The scarcity of demographic data on early film
audience composition in Spain (i.e. sex or age) renders fan mail and published
fan photos invaluable archives towards reconstructing profiles of magazine
readerships. Thus, as a sociologically-oriented survey of reader composition,
this project provides sorely needed data to reconstruct a profile of early
film audiences, a line of study “notoriously difficult to comprehend” in
the early cinema period (Biltereyst 228). Building on recent efforts turning
to computational methods to study magazines and kiosk literature of the
Spanish Silver Age (Romero López and Zamostny 2022), this project is a first
step towards broader application of digital humanities methods to the study
5
of cinema print culture in Spain.

Doing Digital Periodical Research in Spanish: Thinking With
Digital Methods & ‘Toggling’ Between Distant and Close
Reading
In this section we reflect on the challenges of conducting digital periodical
research and the affordances of a mixed macro-micro approach entailing
distant reading and traditional textual studies of close reading. We adopt
the view that a hybrid methodology of distant and traditional close reading
enables an augmented reading that is necessary for any kind of computational
approach to historical periodical research. As asserted by Ryan Cordell,
[…] the best digital periodicals scholarship moves between scales
and media, demonstrating how observations at the macro level,
drawn from digitized corpora, align—or do not—with
observations at the micro level, drawn from archival texts. Such
work pairs the unique capacities of the computer with the
interpretive talents of the human reader […]. (Cordell et al. 5)

4 See Courtney Andree's consideration of early male movie fans, in the United States context.
5 The so-called ‘Silver Age’ of Spain (in Spanish, ‘La Edad de Plata’), is a term commonly used in conventional literary histories to refer to the

period of 1898 to 1939 characterized by flourishing of artistic and cultural production, alongside a burgeoning urbanization and a boom in
mass culture. The term was popularized by José Carlos Mainer’s La Edad de Plata (1902-1931). Ensayo de interpretación de un proceso
cultural (1975). See Antorino (162), and Zamostny & Larson’s Kiosk Literature (2017).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

In a similar vein, scholars in wide-ranging, textual-based digital humanities
projects have increasingly promoted combined research methods,
highlighting the productivity of integrating both scales of analysis (Liu 2011;
Howell et al. 2014). In particular, we borrow Hoyt et al.'s computational
metaphor of ‘toggling’ (26) between different modes of analysis. Ultimately,
we suggest that it is imperative to think with, and not be substituted by,
digital methods, which must be founded, as well as tested, on close reading.
The increasing digital availability in Spain of volumes of cinema-related
print forms such as magazines has invited a new line of computationallydriven research on a grand scale. For this project, we relied on the digital
repository of Catalonia’s Film Archive (Filmoteca de Catalunya), a large
collection of material growing since 2013 that, in addition to film magazines,
includes musical scores, personal legacies, film novels, and posters. As new
material continues to be added, in 2019 a new version of the archive’s openaccess digital collection developed which allowed for simpler navigation and
additional content. Supplementing this source for the current project was
the City Council of Madrid’s Digital Library memoriademadrid (Biblioteca
Digital memoriademadrid) and the Digital Periodical and Newspaper Library
of the National Library of Spain (Hemeroteca Digital de la Biblioteca
Nacional de España).
The complexity and diversity of periodical formats is a methodical challenge
for digital research (Fyfe and Ge 2). Such print publications comprise text
alongside images, varied spacing and fonting styles (size, color, and typeface
such as bolding or italics), intricate page bordering, advertisements, chunks
of small texts, and content arranged in different layouts through columns,
slanted, or circular divisions on the page. It is often overlooked that with
periodicals there is also the frequent inclusion of non-alphabetic symbols in
the text, such as numbers (references to prices, times, dates) or musical notes.
In the particular case of Spain, where many early film plots were adaptions
from lyric theater, and where there was a strong musical-dance tradition,
Spanish film magazines often included sheet music to popular zarzuelas
(plays set to music).
In addition to the formatting complexities of the original analog form of
historical periodicals, there are particular challenges in working with nonanglophone languages. For example, in Spanish diacritic marks are frequent,
dashes are used for dialogue transcriptions, and there are a greater number
of punctuation marks pertaining to exclamation and interrogation (i.e. ¿?,
¡!). Thus, finding suitable computational tools was difficult, especially as
concerns free, open-access software that could perform accurate optical
character recognition (OCR).
Adding yet another layer of difficulty was the varying digitization quality of
the magazines we consulted, and the lack of availability of plain text files. The
digitized periodicals in the repositories we consulted provided downloadable
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 1. An example of dirty OCR (essentially unreadable) from our first attempt at plain text conversion of Popular
Film’s first issue, here of an advertisement for a rail guide, using Adobe Pro.

PDF texts that required conversion into plain text. Thus, we needed to
create our own corpus of plain text files, a task entailing considerable effort,
particularly where keyword-based searching was not possible due to the poor
quality of the scanning. In addition to this, we had to manually perform postcorrection on the OCR output, since significant issues arose with incorrectly
recognized characters and layout formatting (Fig. 1). Unfortunately, OCR
software is notorious for struggling with layout, particularly as it pertains to
multiple-column periodical formats where images are interspersed with the
text (Daems et al. 3). Given how time-consuming text preparation is, in these
situations it is useful, and the only logistically feasible option, to work with
focused corpora. Thus, for our exploratory case study, we chose to center on
one magazine (in this case, Popular Film), and to focus our efforts on only
some sections (here, fan mail and reader contests).
Hoyt et al.'s ‘toggling’ method becomes more imperative when considering
early, understudied film industries where there are few studies to help guide
computational research and contextualize the patterns picked up through
macro methods. Thus, it was necessary for us to limit our computational
approach to Spanish film print culture to a small data set, since distant
reading would not have yielded a reliable, totalizing conclusion at this early
stage of the study. Our analysis fundamentally depended on our human eyes
to carefully and thoroughly read each individual magazine issue. Working
with the media specificities of periodical culture, where material was
produced and consumed in installments which built on one another in
consecutive sequences, made it important for us to read as readers read,
in the order they read, at the time the magazines were published. As will
be illustrated ahead, doing otherwise—reading only distantly and relying
Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

on the algorithmic methods of keyword-based searching of the digitized
archive—ran the risk of decontextualizing the materials into inaccurate and
inauthentic bits of information. Even discovering the treasure trove of fan
photos that were published was due to the manual page-by-page reading of
these magazines. By closely reading these issues as film fans would have, we
were able to detail instances of the ways magazines coached their readers to
be devoted fans, identify special notes to readers, determine if and when
pen names were used by readers in their correspondence to magazines, and
scrutinize the photos of stars as readers would have.
Lastly, a mixed methods approach is particularly necessary for
interdisciplinary collaborations involving research members unfamiliar with
the language of the primary material and its cultural context (in this case,
Spanish, and the cultural milieu of Spain’s early cinema history). The
required hard work that is manual in nature (e.g. reading each individual
magazine issue, creating tabular data for digital analysis, etc.) compels us to
accept that some projects like these take time, entailing immersion both with
the media texts in question (magazines) and the broader cultural context.

Tracing & Visualizing Reader Demographics of Popular Film
By the second decade of the twentieth century, cinema in Spain had become
a mode of entertainment boasting wide networks of distribution and
projection. A specialized illustrated press devoted to cinema had begun as
early as 1907 with magazines such as Cinematógrafo (1907, Madrid), Arte
y Cinematografía (1910-36, Barcelona), El Mundo Cinematográfico
6
(1912-1927, Barcelona), and El Cine (1912-1935, Madrid). During the
1920s, with nearly eighty film magazines circulating the peninsula (García
Carrión, “Spanish Modern Times” 198), these publications were
affordable—costing between 20 to 50 cents, or less than half an hourly
7
wage —and easily accessible, distributed via mail order subscription and
available in kiosks, stationary shops, mobile shop stands, and cinemas (Woods
Peiró 181).
We chose Popular Film for its breath and popularity, and for its widespread
availability in digitized form across various online repositories (Filmoteca
de Catalunya, Biblioteca Digital memoriademadrid, and the Hemeroteca
Digital de la Biblioteca Nacional de España). Published in Barcelona from
1926-1937, Popular Film was a weekly magazine with national and
international distribution that came to publish more than 500 issues (García
Carrión, Por un cine 88). With varied content ranging from articles on

6 The dates of publication for El Mundo Cinematográfico are inconsistent across various record sources, some indicating, for example, a start

date of 1915 (see López Yepes 164). We draw our dates from Palmira González López (928).
7 Speaking to the affordability of cinema’s print culture, Emeterio Díez notes that a worker in Madrid circa 1925 earned 1.25 pesetas per hour

(49).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

fashion, beauty product advertisements, interviews with stars, directors, and
literary writers, film commentary and reviews, gossip columns, and critical
essays on the state of the domestic film industry (Vernon and Peiró 295),
Popular Film played an important role in educating readers how “to consume
cinema and be cinema fans” (Vernon and Peiró 179), knowledgeable in the
inner workings of film creation and in how to be successful movie stars, and
8
with insights into the personal lives of celebrities.
Though data exists about film exhibition and distribution, as well as film
premiers, in early twentieth-century Spain (e.g. García Fernández; Cabero),
the scarcity of demographic data of early film audience composition which
documents, for example, the sex or age of audience members (we have not
found any such data), in parallel with a lack of demographic information
about readers of film magazines (we have not found any such data), alongside
an absence of magazine subscription records—the number of subscribers,
length of subscription, or subscriber information (e.g. name and
address)—renders the fan mail section, or Estafeta, a particularly rich archive
to provide key insight into reader demographics. In the case of Popular Film,
the Estafeta was a regular section featured in almost every issue. It was most
often featured at the middle-point of each magazine, ranging in length but
which most often was a small corner of the page (it eventually was overrun by
the women’s reader correspondence page “Correo femenino”). Notably, the
Estafeta featured editors’ responses to individual letter-writers (as opposed
to the letters themselves) (Fig. 2). Included in editor responses was the
name of the reader and the origin of their letter (e.g. city). In the instances
in which readers were addressed by a pen name or alias (e.g. ‘un simple
9
aficionado’/a simple fan, ‘el indomable’/the indomitable, ‘Clara Bow’), or
by their initials only, the gender-marked grammar (masculine/feminine) of
the Spanish language used by the editor provided clues to the gender (male/
female) of the letter-writer. However, it should be noted that where we were
unable to determine their gender, 1/5 of letter-writers (20%) were marked
as ‘unknown.’ Thus, the basis of forming our dataset of the Estafeta was
marking the issue number, date of publication, respondent name, gender, and
city/region.
A data visualization of the distribution of letter-writers, by gender, who
received responses from editors that were published in the Estafeta, reveals
that male readers inundated the magazine in numbers that far exceeded
those of women (Fig. 3). The magazine’s fan male letter-writers constituted
approximately 67% of correspondents (754/1132) (compared with women, at
13.4%).

8 See Eva Woods Peiró’s study of the ways film magazines in Spain “tutored” their readers to be knowledged film fans (179).
9 Popular Film No. 19 (p. 11), No. 29 (p. 11), No. 123 (p. 8), respectively.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 2. Popular Film’s reader correspondence section, the Estafeta. No. 61 (p. 17).

Figure 3. The distribution of letter-writers, by gender (without the ‘unknown’ counts), in Popular Film’s Estafeta.

This is a striking result for several reasons. We were not expecting this to
be the case, since contemporaneous news coverage in the Spanish general
press emphasized the presence of (middle-class) women and adolescents in
movie theaters, leading researchers to argue that women and children were
the primary consumers of film in Spain (Montero Díaz and Paz Rebollo
123, 125). Indeed, women’s increasing importance as consumers occurred as
film was gaining an audience in Spain in the first decades of the century.
The urban leisure culture of which movies were becoming a key component
“relied in unprecedented ways on the active participation of women”

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

(Kirkpatrick 66), with female consumers thus forming “a salient proportion
of the mass audience that the film industry rapidly developed” (67).
Moreover, film historians have provided sustained analyses of the progressive
feminization of movie fandom in the silent period and have traced the
gendered discourse of film magazines in the 1910s and 20s, particularly in the
United States, “and the degree to which these magazines increasingly spoke
to women” (Orgeron 3). Parallel to this trend, Popular Film had a significant
portion of fixed sections dedicated exclusively to women, increasingly
providing more content ranging from cooking recipes, general beauty and
relationship advice, articles about fashion, and beauty product
advertisements. The magazine also boasted having the most women
correspondents in its staff (García Carrión, Por un cine 88–89 nt. 132). Yet,
in spite of the increasing content directed to women, our results demonstrate
that men disproportionately contributed to the reader correspondence
section, and as we will see, to reader contests.
Returning to our analysis of the Estafeta, with access to the names of the
locations from which readers sent their letters, we also decided to look at
the spread of the readership around and beyond the Iberian Peninsula. First,
we extracted unique locales from our dataset, after which we automatically
determined their latitude and longitude using Wikipedia parsing (in
Wikipedia markup, <span> tags and the “latitude” and “longitude” classes
are responsible for these parameters, respectively). If we could not determine
a location automatically, we added the locale and all relevant information
manually. As a result, we had a total of 168 locales in our dataset. In
addition, we also collected statistics on how many letters came from which
locale. Adding these to our dataset allowed us to mark points on the map
built in the RStudio program with the help of the parzer (responsible for
parsing geodata) and leaflet libraries (allowing us to visualize geodata) and to
determine the “weight” of the locale in the corpus of letters. We attributed
the highest weight degree to those locations from which the editorial staff of
Popular Film received more than 48 letters; the lowest weight, in turn, was
typical for the places from which readers sent at most 3 letters.
A geospatial analysis of letter-writer origins demonstrates cinephile audiences
beyond the large metropolises of Madrid and Barcelona, as in the middlesize cities of northeastern Bilbao (Basque Country) and Zaragoza (Aragón),
the northwestern city of Valladolid (Castile & León), southeastern Valencia
and Alicante, and southwestern Málaga (Andalucía) (Fig. 4). On occasion,
some readers wrote from beyond the Spanish mainland, including from
neighboring north African Spanish-colony Morocco (particularly Tetuán,
Larache, and Ceuta), the Spanish Canary Islands (particularly Las Palmas),
and Mallorca. The geospatial visualization underlines one surprising detail:
Barcelona, the magazine’s home base and an important and powerful center
of early film production, exhibition, and distribution in Spain until about
1923 (Pavlović et al. 6-7), did not produce a majority of letter-writers. One
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 4. A geospatial visualization of letter-writer origins throughout the Iberian Peninsula, using RStudio.

possibility to account for this anomaly is that Estafeta entries addressed to
‘Ciudad’/city (about 10%) may be a reference to the Catalonian capital; there
was also about 29% of editor responses that did not include a city or regional
reference, and we marked these in our dataset as ‘not listed.’

Topic Modelling Fan Mail: Subscribing to Celebrity Craze
As readers wrote from all over Spain, topic modeling Popular Film’s fan
mail section provides a broad snapshot on the issues and subjects that most
interested readers. Topic modelling is a method stemming from text mining,
“a research practice that involves using computational analysis to discover
information from vast quantities of digital, free-form, natural-language,
unstructured text” (Zubiaurre and Kurtz 119). From text mining, topic
modeling allows researchers to summarize topics of interest by identifying
words that tend to appear together and in close proximity (120).
To build the corpus of texts for topic analysis, we recognized the Estafeta
section from the digitized numbers using ABBYY FineReader, resulting in
93 plain text files (corresponding to the number of issues featuring the
Estafeta, out of 175 total issues consulted) and a total of 34,765 words
in the corpus. These were subsequently manually proofread and “cleaned”
of irregular spacing, inconsistent accent-marking and punctuation, name
misspellings, and mojibake. The following preprocessing of texts consisted of
basic steps: first, we lemmatized the corpus using the python library spaCy,
which supports processing of Spanish language, and second, we eliminated
punctuation and “stop words.” Since we were interested in examining

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

content words (nouns, adjectives, verbs) rather than function words (articles,
conjunctions, prepositions, pronouns), the latter made up the majority list of
“stop words.”
Using the preprocessed corpus, we built topic models based on the popular
Dirichlet Latent Distribution algorithm (LDA) using MALLET software. As
an input, the algorithm receives the texts and the number of topics to be
detected in the corpus. As an output, it produces lists each consisting of the
most typical words within the corresponding topic. To determine the optimal
number of topics, we set the range of possible values of to be from 1 to
20. Then we built a separate LDA model for each number of topics in this
interval. As a result, for each between 1 and 20 we got lists of words
defining topics for the th model (one list for the first model, two for the
second one, and so on). After that we used two approaches to select the ideal
topic number from this range.
The first one is based on the comparison of each pair of neighboring LDA
models (one topic LDA model vs. two topics LDA model, two topics LDA
model vs. three topics LDA model, etc.), using the average Jaccard similarity
coefficient. This coefficient helps check the degree of topic overlap and define
a moment when the extraction of a new topic is excessive. The lower the
coefficient of topics similarity the better, since this means that the topics
are more heterogeneous. Consequently, if comparing the th model with the
th model produced a value greater than in the previous step (when
th model), then is the optimal value
comparing the th model with the
of the topics. According to this measure, the ideal topic number for our
corpus equaled 7.
To confirm this value, we used the second approach, founded on the results
of Topic Coherence measurement. In comparison to the Jaccard coefficient,
the Topic Coherence method estimates the degree of semantic similarity
between high-weighted words inside one topic and helps to define whether
the topic is “high-quality.” The “high-quality” in this case means that all the
words in the topics are more or less from the same semantic field. To calculate
the coherence of each topic, we count the semantic relatedness of each pair of
words from the topic and sum these values. For each pair of words, the value
will be high if the words often co-occur in the texts, and low if they are more
often found separately.
Next, we average the coherence scores for all the topics in a given model (the
1st LDA model will have one score, since it consists only of one topic, the
2nd LDA model will have an average of two scores since it is comprised of
two topics). Selecting an excessive number of topics will result in topics with
a random set of words, and hence a low coherence score. As a consequence,
the average coherence will decrease, which means that the point of optimum
we are interested in should be reached at the maximum of the average. If

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 5. Model metrics per number of topics.

we look at the plot (Fig. 5), we will discover that the optimal value of the
coherence score is at the same mark as the value obtained by calculating the
Jaccard coefficient, which means that this is an ideal number of topics for this
collection of texts.
With the heuristics described above, we detected 7 topics in our corpus
and represented each of them as a word clouds formed of 150 of the most
weighted words in each. Below we discuss the most telling of these topics,
some of which emerge as among the most frequent, and what they reveal
about readers’ interests (Fig. 6). Overall, the thematic trends discussed below
emphasize that readers were eager to 1) learn about, and reach out to, their
favorite stars, and 2) become magazine subscribers.
Topic model no. 6, most prevalent in the Estafeta’s first year between issue
numbers 3-62 (Aug. 1926-Oct. 1927) and prominently featuring words such
as ‘California’ and ‘New York City,’ among others, reveals readers were eager
to send fan mail directly to film celebrities. Male readers inquired most for
the address (‘dirección’) of Hollywood stars (women and men), and editors
most frequently directed readers to the addresses of Paramount, Universal,
and MGM headquarters. Topic models 3 and 7 suggests that readers were
also eager to learn the names of stars/protagonists (‘estrella’/‘protagonista’) of
various films and the studios (‘estudio’) they pertained to, and sought advice
about the language in which they should direct their fan letters, visible in
topic model 7 in such references to Spanish (‘español’), Castillian Spanish
(‘castellano’), know (‘saber’), and speak (‘hablar’). Though a significant
disadvantage of topic modeling is that word analysis often separates words
that tend to appear together, such as names, and that there is no capitalization

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 6. From topic modelling the Estafeta, five selected topics presented as word clouds.

of these (Bonmatí Gonzálvez 130, nt. 17), we were able to piece names
together and learn who some of these stars were. According to topic models
3, 6, and 7, they were Gloria Swanson, Norma Talmage, Lili Damita, Bebe
Daniels, Douglas Fairbanks, Mae Murray, Greta Garbo, Mary Pickford, and
the romantic duo Janet Gaynor and Charles Farrell. Though male readers
exhibited a transnational fandom in their inquiries about Hollywood stars,
they were also invested in the local industry and eager to connect with
Spanish-speaking actors they could write to in Spanish, visible in the
references in topic model 7 to Antonio Moreno, Ramón Novarro, Raquel
Meller (in her role as ‘Carmen’ in the 1926 film of the same name), and
Manuel San Germán, a protagonist of the Spanish-hit Malvaloca (1927),
whose Madrilenean home address (‘San Bernardo 5’) appeared constantly
throughout the Estafeta. Overall, reader enthusiasm to write to celebrities
reflects the magazine’s efforts to encourage fans to write to stars, regardless of
the fan’s cultural, geographic, and even linguistic origins.
Male readers were also eager not to miss a special issue of Popular Film and
were keen to regularly read the magazine by becoming subscribers. Topic
model 2, appearing rather consistently in spurts throughout the entire corpus
but more intensely at end-of-year and new year issues (between issue numbers
51-72 and 125-131), shows that readers often inquired about subscription
information (‘suscripción,’ ‘importe’/price), particular issue numbers
(‘número’) (such as issue number 5, dedicated to Rudolph Valentino
following the announcement of his death in the fourth issue), and an interest
in special end-of-year issues, such as the 100-page 1928 almanac edition,
advertised in no. 72 as containing “numerous portraits in rotogravure of the

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

brightest stars of foreign and national cinematography; artistic photographs
of the most beautiful women on the screen; caricatures of great film artists,
and literary works” (17).
Featuring the most frequent items throughout the entire corpus of the
Estafeta was topic model 5. Yet these were not revealing, consisting of
grammatical elements—auxiliary verbs such as ‘be’ (ser) and ‘have’ (haber)
and determiners/pronouns such as ‘that’ (ese) and ‘one’ (uno). However,
we note the presence of the plural possessive ‘nuestro’ (our) suggests an
effort to reader inclusivity. Indeed, Spanish film magazines constructed an
inclusive network of fan culture through generic reference with the definite
article, such as “the spectator” or “the public,” and the possessive firstperson plural “our readers” (masculine gender forms by default in Spanish).
This was complemented by a patent effort to directly address women and
men, through gender-marked suffixes, such as feminine amiga lectora “reader
friend” and masculine lector amable “amiable reader.”

Network Analysis of Popular Film’s Photo Contestants: Young,
Aspiring Actors-Sportsmen
In addition to fan mail, another key mode in which male readers participated
in fan culture was through magazine reader contests. Demonstrating a
remarkable mastery of films and stars, male readers bombarded film
magazines with entry ballots to reader contests, ranging from naming and
visual identification contests to puzzles and writing competitions. A closer
look at announcements of contest results reveals that male readers cultivated
keen star knowledge since they often won first or second place in these
contests, or were featured in most numbers as having correctly guessed
10
answers.
In addition to demonstrating their expertise on film stars, male fans displayed
ambitions for stardom and fan creativity in their participation in a very
different kind of reader contest: the photogenic, or star-search contest.
Compared with mail inquiries or reader contests such as writing
competitions, the concurso fotogénico involved a deeper kind of personal
participation, as it spoke to the professional aspirations of movie fans. In her
consideration of the star-search contest in the United States, Marsha Orgeron
has argued that this was “the ultimate and in some ways most radical act
of sanctioned participation” (4) in that it most intensely “appealed to the
transformative fantasies of movie fans” (15).

10 For example, based on the names listed of readers who guessed correctly, Cine-Revista’s 1922 competition “The masked aces,” (e.g., the

masked Carol Holloway and Sessue Hayakawa), featured 28/46 male readers (61%) (no. 33, p. 4), Cine-Popular’s 1923 cropped-eye puzzle
game, “Whose eyes are these?” had male readers winning 1st-4th place (no. 111, p.15), and Siluetas’ 1930 rhombus puzzle contest listed 18/
23 male readers (78%) (no. 15, p. 10).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Table 1. Distribution of male and female contestants in four star-search contests run between 1922-1930 in four different film magazines
(Cine-Revista, El Cine, Popular Film, and Siluetas).
Magazine
photo
contest

Date of
contest

Total # of
photos
published

Male
contestants

Female
contestants

Age range
(of male
participants)

Average
age (of male
participants)

Overall %
of male
participants

CineRevista

1922

21

18

3

15-41

19

86%

El Cine

1923

31

22

9

15-24

18

71%

Popular
Film

1926-1927

240

196

44

6-46

19

82%

Siluetas

1930

66

46

20

17-35

20

70%

To entice readers, these contests played into the allure of easy celebrity by
promising the possibility of instant fame with the pledge of acting contracts
to the victors, to be chosen by readers by mail-in vote (though the prospects
of these contest winners usually never materialized). Unlike similar contests
abroad, those in Spain had no set age limits (e.g. that contestants had to
11
be between 18 and 30) nor were they geared to women only. In fact,
the contests were actively aimed at all sectors of Spanish society, including
children and teenagers, by promising two winners, one male and one female
reader. Strikingly, in four “photogenic” star-search contests run between
1922-1930, among the magazines Cine-Revista, El Cine, Popular Film, and
Siluetas, featured male fan photographs far outnumbered those of female
contestants, forming a whopping 79% (282/358) of total published photos
across all four magazines (Table 1).
Particularly notable for the number of male participants is Popular Film’s
star-search contest ¿Tengo condiciones de ser artista de cine?/“Do I have the
conditions to be a film star?” which ran over a six-month period between
1926 and 1927. Readers residing anywhere in Spain (regardless of nationality)
were invited to send two photos, a bust and full body picture, together
with information pertaining to their age, height, weight, eye color, hair
color, sports they played, intellectual abilities, and artistic experience. This
information formed the basis of two datasets, the first of which contains the
metadata of the magazine and information about the name, gender, and age
of all contestants, while the second is devoted exclusively to male contestants
and includes more complete personal data on height, weight, eye color, hair
color, and different types of hobbies.
To entice readers to participate, the magazine promised that the winners
would be cast in a future film (though this never actually transpired). As it
turns out, adolescent boys and young men—primarily between the ages of 14
and 22 (160/196 male contestants, or approximately 82%) (Fig. 7)—flooded

11 Richard Abel has argued that American local talent contests targeted “mostly young women” (134), and Myriam Juan has noted that in

France these competitions were often “for women only” (204).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 7. The distribution of male contestants, by age, in Popular Film’s star-search photo contest, based on reader
information provided alongside published photos.

the publisher with photographs, forming an overwhelming 82% (196/240)
12
majority in contestants whose photographs were published. A data
visualization makes it easier to observe, in a systematic way, the increasing
number of photographs of male readers as the competition progressed (Fig.
8). While we don’t know the total number of photos that the magazine
received from readers (male & female), a closer look at an editor’s response
13
to one letter-writer indicates that the magazine received over 1,500 photos.
Given the competition’s success, one suspects that this estimate is likely to
be true and that the magazine simply didn’t have the space to publish all
photos, suggesting that editors made a selection of reader photos to publish,
rendering the featuring of male reader photographs even more remarkable.
Following the lead of the first four reader contestants to be featured in
the contest—who were all adolescent boys and young men (notably, the
first contestant was a 12-year-old Manuel Bernal de los Santos, the second
14
a 14-year-old Bernardino Alonso del Olmo) —male readers were
overwhelmingly featured in full-page spreads of the magazine (Fig 9).
Depicting creative versatility, reader photographs often emulated the
expressions, postures, and costumes of stars, including comic and serious
poses, front-facing and side-facing portraits, and elegant dress (Fig. 10).
With professional-looking photographs, and given the way they looked and

12 The published photographs featuring male readers participating in Popular Film’s photo contest can be found on p. 16 in issue numbers

17-18 & 20-22; on p. 12 in issue numbers 23-33; and on p. 16 in issue numbers 34-44.
13 Popular Film, No. 91, p. 10.
14 The photographs of these first two contestants can be found in Popular Film’s issue no. 17 (p. 16) & no. 18 (p. 16), respectively.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 8. The distribution of contestants, by gender, whose photos were featured (published) in Popular Film’s starsearch photo contest.

Figure 9. A full-page spread in Popular Film’s issue no. 40 (5 May 1927) (p. 16), featuring numerous male reader
photographs.

dressed—clean haircuts, suit and tie, luxurious-looking fur coats, bow-ties,
pocket squares, or top-hats—most male contestants appear to be upper
middle class or of aristocratic backgrounds. Attire alone, however, can be
Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 10. A selection of male contestants featured in Popular Film’s star-search photo contest, emulating the
expressions, postures, and costumes of stars.
These photographs can be found in the following issue numbers of Popular Film: José Alegre (No. 44, p. 16); Miguel
Molina Ruiz (No. 42, p. 16); Antonio A. Fozmark (No. 31, p. 12); Joaquín Castro Morilla (No. 27, p. 12); Miguel
Gutiérrez (No. 24, p. 12); and José Roda (No. 26, p. 12).

misleading about the social classes of the magazine’s male readers, since
appearing glamorous was part of the goal in emulating the grace and style of
movie stars (Juan 207).
Offering more concrete clues is a network analysis of the sports and
intellectual-artistic experiences that male fans listed with their photo
submissions. To prepare the dataset, we manually created an Excel spreadsheet
listing each hobby and intellectual/artistic experience of each individual
contestant (ranging from 1-7 sports & 1-4 intellectual/artistic experiences
for each reader-contestant, when listed). For example, among sports and
intellectual/artistic activities were “boxing,” “swimming,” “soccer,” “dance,”
“theater,” and “literature.” We note that for the more consistent network
of hobbies we minimally modified the descriptions of intellectual/artistic
experience and united some under a more uniform label. For example, the
“Music” category includes descriptions by reader-contestants such as “8 years
experience with piano, harmony, and composition,” “Student of Alicante’s
Municipal Band,” and “Violin professor,” while the “Education” category
included such self-descriptions as “High school education,” “Advanced in
primary education,” and “Secondary school education.”
Using this list of hobbies and experiences, we generated a co-occurrence
matrix, which consequently became the basis for the visualization of our
network (Fig. 11). In Gephi software, we got an undirected graph of 49 nodes

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 11. A network analysis of Popular Film’s male photo contestants, depicting the sports and intellectual/artistic
hobbies they practiced.

and 234 edges, where nodes are the names of hobbies and edges are their cooccurrence in a list provided by one person. The size of the nodes depends on
the number of connections with other nodes, while the weight of the edges
represents the number of intersections of a pair of nodes. The network is
colored according to the modularity measure that allows us to detect different
communities in the graph. Thus, after the calculation of this measure, we
discovered 5 main groups of hobbies, inside which sports and other activities
have the densest connections. An important feature of this network is that it
does not represent such a category as “cultivates various sports,” a note that
accompanied approximately 24% of male contestant photos who did not list
specific sports or intellectual/artistic experiences, and, consequently, had no
nodal connections to other hobbies. The same pertains to those we marked as
“not listed” (13%), when male contestants had no sports or hobbies included
with their published photo.
The sports that male readers listed suggests a more nuanced mixture of
readers than their sophisticated poses in front of the camera first suggests.
In Spain, sports were an urban phenomenon “that involved sharp class
distinctions” (Cuesta 331). Alongside prestigious activities such as drawing
or knowing a foreign language like French, bicycling, horse-riding, fencing,
and car-racing was practiced by the middle-upper class and aristocracy. Yet
soccer and boxing, two of the top sports mentioned by readers, was a modern
mass-spectator sport in Spain that “brought the lower-middle class and the
working class into the sports world” (Cuesta 331), suggesting that a portion
of male readers may have pertained to these sectors.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

What Lies Beyond the Word: Reading Contextually with Our
Eyes
Digital methods such as text mining, topic modeling, and network analysis
work well as exploratory techniques that can reveal clues and patterns. Yet
while digital methods may make it easier to mine large amounts of data,
the challenge remains of framing and interpreting that data, particularly in
areas of study without prior research to draw from. Unsurprisingly, a manual
reading of the magazine’s individual issues provided a more complete picture
of the magazine’s readership and insights that our computational text analysis
of the Estafeta alone would not have detected. While we don’t know how
many letters the magazine actually received (on a weekly/biweekly/monthly
basis), occasional ‘special notes’ reminding readers to become subscribers
with the benefit of gaining priority in receiving responses from editors make
reference to having to respond to “more than 500 letters.” Although we
also don’t know the total number of photos submitted to the star-search
photo contest, coverage of the contest’s outcome in later issues provided
some clues to the remarkable size of voter participation: an announcement
of the upcoming results in no. 56 mentions that votes are in the “several
thousands” (p. 16) and the announcement of the winners was accompanied
by the number of votes they received (14,273 for the male winner, and 18,615
15
for the female victor).
Fan photos provide a treasure trove for film audience studies in
authenticating the existence of a community of movie fans. Where fan letters
have been questioned by film historians as to their authenticity and accurate
reflection of magazine readers (e.g. Fuller-Seeley 153), a close-reading of the
Estafeta revealed that many readers writing to the magazine were also featured
in the photo contest, connecting the names to the faces. As we manually read
each editor response and noted the names of those readers who appeared
multiple times, we were able to identify the names of those whom we may
refer to as ‘super fans’—readers who wrote more than once to the magazine
and who submitted a photo that was published. These male super fans wrote
not only to ask about their favorite stars, but were anxious to know whether
their photos had been received and when they would be published. This was
the case with 15-year-old Nazario González from Elche and 16-year-old Luis
Ballesteros from Málaga (Fig. 12), who each wrote to the Estafeta editor on
at least three occasions about the photo competition and inquiring when the
magazine would create a new contest they could participate in.
With this information, we were then able to do make use of the affordances
of computer keyword searching for particular names in other magazines,
learning that some of these super fans were simultaneously writing to various

15 Popular Film, no. 57, pp. 4 & 5, respectively.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Figure 12. Movie ‘super-fans’ Nazario González, Luis Ballesteros Moreno, and Sebastián Gallart.
These photographs can be found in the following issue numbers of Popular Film: Nazario González (No. 40, p. 16);
Luis Ballesteros Moreno (No. 39, p. 16); Sebastián Gallart (No. 39, p. 16).

magazines at once. 16-year-old Sebastián Gallart wrote repeatedly to Popular
Film in 1927 with subscription questions, but also occasionally to the reader
opinion section “Our readers say” of the Madrilenean film magazine La
Pantalla. One of Gallart’s opinion letters was deemed “the best,” winning
first prize in La Pantalla’s third issue. Demonstrating his keen enthusiasm
for cinema, the young teenager praises the black-bottom dance routines
in the Hollywood motion picture Cabaret, criticizes Gilda Gray’s at times
“exaggerated” performance in the film, and applauds Tom Moore’s role as the
16
detective in love.
Lastly, our topic models of the Estafeta did not capture the fervency of male
readers in presenting themselves as devoted and informed movie fans keen to
share opinions and critical expertise. A close reading of the first twenty issues
of editor responses to fan mail reveals, early into the magazine’s lifecycle,
that male fans exhibited hobbyist dispositions and creative inclinations by
regularly corresponding with the publication to pitch ideas to the editorial
board and requesting to collaborate with the magazine to publish original
work. Further examination of the magazine’s early issues demonstrates that
the publication promised to be a site of cinephilic exchange for a community
of movie fans, where readers could share with one another—and prove to
each other—their critical expertise and creative talents by enticing readers
with the opportunity to voice their opinions in their new section “Nuestros
lectores colaboran”/Our readers collaborate.

16 “Nuestros lectores dicen,” La Pantalla, no. 3 (2 Dec 1927), 39.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

The section, short-lived in that it appeared in only 13 issues over six months
between December 1926 and May 1927, featured brief prose essays, poems,
and short stories, and encouraged readers to submit “brief works that are sent
to us spontaneously” (no. 20, p. 2). Readers debated the state of the Spanish
industry, praised and critiqued films and stars (e.g. Ben-Hur, Mae Murray),
and commented on the artistic divide between theater and film. Of the 28
readers who were featured, only two were women; several male readers were
featured multiple times, including an L. Linares Lorca, a reader who had
written to the Estafeta inquiring about whether his work was ‘publishable’
and who would go on to become a regular contributor to the magazine’s
content, as well as to other contemporaneous film magazines, including El
Cine. The brief lifespan of the new section and the interruption of inquiries
about collaborating with the magazine suggests efforts to curtail the excessive
interaction of some readers with the magazine.

Conclusion: New Sources of Evidence
This project contributes to an archaeology of cinema fandom broadly, and
Spain’s early film fan culture specifically, by turning to digital methods—text
mining, modeling, data processing, GIS mapping, data visualization—to trace
male movie fans in Spain. As an exploratory case study, we considered fan
interactivity with the magazine Popular Film. In particular, we considered
reader participation in two particular sections of this magazine: the Estafeta,
or fan mail section, and the reader photo contest, “Do I have the conditions
to be a film star?” Our results counter any assumptions that male moviegoing
audiences, unlike the star-struck female fan, were composed of emotionally
detached spectators or who were uninvolved in celebrity consumer culture.
Analyses of correspondence and photos demonstrate that Spain’s early
cinema fan base was unequivocally composed of a strikingly large proportion
of readers who were male and who were actively ardent fans. That male
readers actively engaged with the magazine by sending mail inquiring about
movie stars and how to reach them and eagerly participating in the star-search
photo contest, appears to suggest that male readers were remarkably invested
in celebrity consumer culture.
Methodologically, in conducting this study, we reflected on the challenges of
digital approaches to pursuing historical periodical research and advocated for
the affordances of a mixed macro-micro approach entailing distant reading
and traditional textual studies of close reading. By adopting a hybrid
framework, digital methods provide new opportunities to discover evidence
of male movie fans in Spain.
Data repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/K8R6MV
Submitted: April 01, 2024 EDT, Accepted: May 21, 2024 EDT

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

works cited
Abel, Richard. Menus for Movieland: Newspapers and the Emergence of American Film Culture,
1913-1916. University of California Press, 2015.
Alberich, Ferran, et al. “Film Clubs, Festivals, Archives, and Magazines.” A Companion to Spanish
Cinema, edited by Jo Labanyi and Tatjana Pavlović , Wiley Blackwell, 2013, pp. 434–63.
Andree, Courtney. “Broncho Billy and the Problem of the Male Movie Fan.” Film History, vol. 26,
no. 3, 2014, pp. 57–83.
Anselmo-Sequeira, Diana. “Screen-Struck: The Invention of the Movie Girl Fan.” Cinema Journal,
vol. 55, no. 1, 2015, pp. 1–28, https://doi.org/10.2979/filmhistory.26.3.57.
Antorino, Thomas. “Women and Spanish Kiosk Literature (1907-1939).” Bulletin of Hispanic
Studies, vol. 100, no. 2, 2023, pp. 159–79, https://doi.org/10.3828/bhs.2023.13.
Biltereyst, Daniel. “The Other Panicking Audience: A New Cinema History Approach to Early
Cinemagoing, Cinema Fires, Disasters and Panics.” New Perspectives on Early Cinema History.
Concepts, Approaches, Audiences, edited by Mario Slugen and Daniel Biltereyst, Bloomsbury, 2022,
pp. 229–49.
Bonmatí Gonzálvez, Elena. “A Distant and Close Reading Analysis of Spanish Anarchist Magazines
and Erotic Magazines of the Early Twentieth Century.” Romero López & Zamostny, pp. 123–45.
Cabero, Juan Antonio. Historia de la cinematografía española (1896-1948). Gráficas Cinema, 1949.
Cordell, Ryan, et al. “Forum: Digital Approaches to Periodical Studies.” American Periodicals, vol.
25, no. 1, 2015, pp. 1–24.
Cuesta, Luis. “Sports-Themes Kiosk Novelettes and the Silver Age Debate on Tradition and
Modernity.” Kiosk Literature of Silver Age Spain: Modernity and Mass Culture, edited by Jeffrey
Zamostny and Susan Larson, Intellect, 2017, pp. 329–52.
Daems, Joke, et al. “Digital Approaches Towards Serial Publications.” Journal of European
Periodical Studies, vol. 4, no. 1, 2019, pp. 1–7.
Díez, Emeterio. “La Novela Cinematográ fica.” RILCE, vol. 17, no. 1, 2001, pp. 45–64.
Fuller-Seeley, Kathryn. At the Picture Show: Small-Town Audiences and the Creation of Movie Fan
Culture. Smithsonian Institute Press, 1996.
Fyfe, Paul, and Qian Ge. “Image Analytics and the Nineteenth-Century Illustrated Newspaper.”
Journal of Cultural Analytics, Oct. 2018, pp. 1–25.
García Carrión, Marta. Por un cine patrio: Cultura cinematográfica y nacionalismo español
(1926-1936). Universitat de València, 2013.
---. “Spanish Modern Times: A Cinematographic National Sphere in the First Third of the
Twentieth Century.” The Configuration of the Spanish Public Sphere: From the Enlightenment to
the Indignados, edited by David Jimé nez Torres and Leticia Villamediana Gonzá lez, Berghahn,
2019, pp. 192–211.
García Fernández, Emilio. El cine español entre 1896 y 1936. Historia, industria, filmografía y
documentos. Ariel, 2002.
González López, Palmira. El cine en Barcelona, una generación histórica: 1906-1923. University of
Barcelona, https://www.google.com/
url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjy4XjydiDAxXzg4kEHfXrAGA4
ChAWegQIBxAB&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.tdx.cat%2Fbitstream%2Fhandle%2F10803%2F226
96%2F07.PGL_7de16.pdf%3Fsequence%3D7&usg=AOvVaw1f1bRp8XEytlmUAMU8cZi7&opi
=89978449.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

A Digital Archaeology of Early Hispanic Film Culture: Film Magazines and the Male Fan Reader

Howell, Sonia, et al. “A Digital Humanities Approach to Narrative Voice in The Secret Scripture:
Proposing a New Research Method.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 8, no. 2, 2014.
Hoyt, Eric. “Lenses for Lantern: Data Mining, Visualization, and Excavating Film History’s
Neglected Sources.” Film History, vol. 26, no. 2, 2014, pp. 146–68.
---. “Variety’s Transformations: Digitizing and Analyzing the First 35 Years of the Canonical Trade
Paper.” Mapping Movie Magazines. Digitization, Periodicals and Cinema History, edited by
Daniel Biltereyst and Lies Van de Vijver, Palgrave Macmillan, 2020, pp. 17–38.
Juan, Myriam. “Looking at Movie Fans: On Pictures Published in French Film Magazines of the
Interwar Years.” Mapping Movie Magazines: Digitization, Periodicals and Cinema History, edited
by Daniel Biltereyst and Lies Van de Vijver, Palgrave Macmillan, 2020, pp. 201–20.
Kirkpatrick, Susan. “Cinema, Modernity, and the Women of ’27.” Anales de la literatura española
contemporánea, vol. 35, no. 1, 2010, pp. 63–88.
Klenotic, Jeffrey. “Putting Cinema History on the Map. Using GIS to Explore the Spatiality of
Cinema.” Explorations in New Cinema History: Approaches and Case Studies, edited by Richard
Maltby et al., Blackwell, 2011, pp. 58–84.
Liu, Alan. Close, Distant, and Unexpected Reading: New Forms of Literary Reading in the Digital
Age. http://stream.humlab.umu.se/index.php?streamName=closedistant. HUMlab, Umeå
University, Sweden.
López Yepes, Alfonso. “Catálogo de revistas cinematográficas españolas (1907-1989).” Revista
General de Información y Documentación, vol. 2, no. 1, 1992, pp. 199–208.
Maltby, Richard, and Melvin Stokes. “Introduction.” Going to the Movies: Hollywood and the Social
Experience of Cinema, edited by Richard Maltby et al., University of Exeter Press, 2007, pp. 1–22.
Montero Díaz, Julio, and Maía Antonia Paz Rebollo. “Ir al cine en España en el primer tercio del
siglo XX.” Ver cine: los públicos cinematográficos en el siglo XX, edited by José Vidal Palaz López,
Rialp, 2002, pp. 91–136.
Noordegraaf, Julia, et al. “Writing Cinema Histories with Digital Databases: The Case of Cinema
Context.” Journal for Media History, vol. 21, no. 2, 2018, pp. 106–26.
Orgeron, Marsha. “‘You Are Invited to Participate’: Interactive Fandom in the Age of the Movie
Magazine.” Journal of Film and Video, vol. 61, no. 3, 2009, pp. 3–23.
Pavlović , Tatjana, et al. 100 Years of Spanish Cinema. Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
Pego, Aurelio. “Ramón Novarro, actor cinematográfico por equivocación.” Popular Film, no. 124,
Dec. 1928, pp. 3–4.
Romero López, Dolores, and Jeffrey Zamostny. Towards the Digital Cultural History of the Other
Silver Age Spain. Peter Lang, 2022, https://doi.org/10.3726/b19485.
Stamp, Shelley. Movie-Struck Girls: Women and Motion Picture Culture after the Nickelodeon.
Princeton University Press, 2000.
Vernon, Kathleen, and Eva Woods Peiró. “The Construction of the Star System.” A Companion to
Spanish Cinema, edited by Labanyi and Pavlović , pp. 293–318.
Woods Peiró , Eva. “Cinema Literacy in Cinema Fan Magazines and the Novela Cinematográ fica.”
Kiosk Literature of Silver Age Spain: Modernity and Mass Culture, edited by Zamostny and
Larson, pp. 175–206.
Zubiaurre, Maite, and Wendy Perla Kurtz. “Digitizing Erotica: A Virtual Wunderkammer: Sexual
Cultures in Early Twentieth-Century Spain.” Romero López & Zamostny, pp. 107–22.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

