Journal of
Cultural Analytics

May 3, 2019

Response by the Special Interest
Group on Digital Literary Stylistics to
Nan Z. Da's Study
J. Berenike Herrmanna, Anne-Sophie Boriesa, Francesca Frontinib, Simone Reborac,
Jan Rybickid
a

University of Basel, Germany bPaul Valéry University, Montpellier cUniversity of Verona
Kraków, Poland

d

University of

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Article DOI: 10.22148/001c.11827

The publication of Nan Z. Da's study in Critical Inquiry has triggered a debate about the

Journal ISSN: 2371-4549

methodological and conceptual dimensions of digitally assisted inquiry in literary studies.
Nan Z. Da's fundamental critique of what she calls "Computational Literary Studies"
addresses

the

work

of the

international Special Interest Group"DigitalLiterary

Stylistics"(SIG-DLS) of the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations (ADHO). Thus
we—the five scholars forming the SIG's current steering committee—would like to make a
short statement.

The publication of Nan Z. Da's study in Critical Inquiry has triggered a debate
about the methodological and conceptual dimensions of digitally assisted inquiry
in literary studies. Nan Z. Da's fundamental critique of what she calls
"Computational Literary Studies" addresses the work of the international Special
Interest Group"DigitalLiterary Stylistics"(SIG-DLS) of the Alliance of Digital
Humanities Organizations (ADHO). Thus we—the five scholars forming the
SIG's current steering committee—would like to make a short statement.
Initially, we found it a bit surprising that a paper with so many formal,
methodological, and theoretical flaws has received so much serious attention.
Formal and conceptual problems of the paper have been documented in
abundance (see Andrew Piper's Do we know what we're doing?, the responses at
the Critical Inquiry blog, and twitter), and we don't see it as our role to add much
at this level of the discussion. However, from the point of view of an international
SIG dedicated to literary stylistics—and digital literary studies—stretching across
traditional disciplinary and methodological boundaries, we would like to make a
few observations.
First, we observe that Nan Z. Da does not refer to the wealth of European, SouthAmerican, Australian, African, and Asian contributions to what she calls

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

"Computational Literary Studies." Meanwhile, there is a substantial body of nonNorth-American contributions to international journals (such as Digital
Humanities Quarterlyor Digital Scholarship in the Humanities), and also our SIG
represents members from around the world. It thus appears that the paper is to be
primarily understood within the North-American frame—including its particular
reference frame of prestige, distribution of research funding and recruitment
strategies. A geographic, or cultural, bias may thus indeed be added to the
problems that the paper has. And of course, there is room for asking questions
about the author's actual motives.
Second, the fact that the paper has triggered a very serious debate points to a
larger phenomenon extending beyond the North-American scholarly frame. It is
thus of direct importance to any scholar using computational assistance in the
study of literary texts: within the Humanities there exists a number of scholars
and institutions mounting an irreconcilable reproach against any "digital" or
"computational" approaches to literary texts. This position centers around the
contention that "literature" is not "reducable" to "numbers" (as well as on a
perceived excess in distribution of funds to "DH"). In its extreme forms, this
position goes beyond a "healthy skepticism." Past experience shows that limiting
"permissible" scholarly approaches for ideological reasons is both harmful and
ineffective.
Third, we would like to highlight the difference between "CLS" and "DLS", thus,
between "computational" and "digital" approaches, where "digital" is the more
encompassing notion subsuming contributions from the established disciplines of
computational linguistics, text mining, and NLP, as well as corpus linguistics and
corpus stylistics. It thus comprises also computer-enhanced close reading, for
example by means of keyword in context (KWIC), or digital annotations of
various—including hermeneutic—kinds. This factual practice counters Da's
statement that CLS analyses are essentially run "without regard to position,
syntax, context, and semantics" (p. 611). Da does not seem to be aware of the
actual range of methods and the various traditions present in DLS. Whether in
quantitative or qualitative studies, scholars have persistently striven to account
for the complexity of literary discourse, and thus get much beyond "basic word
frequencies" (p. 606).

2

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Fourth, digital literary studies, including Cultural Analytics, are an
interdisciplinary, collaborative, and highly diverse endeavor. In opposition to
traditional literary studies, digital studies require many hands, with labs as spaces
for collaboration. It is precisely at these spaces, which can have many different
organizational incarnations, where an interface of "hermeneutic" and
"computational" communities is created. With a growing number of opportunities
for making this kind of contact, it is up to the individual scholar to explore the
full range of methods, scaling the grade of reduction, contextualization, and
degree of direct scholarly interpretation.
Finally, in his opening response, Andrew Piper (quite generously) states that Nan
Z. Da's paper "is part of a growing body of work that seeks to introduce the idea
of replication into the humanities." We fully endorse this line of work, and see it
as one of our SIG's main offices to further it—by fostering exchange and
discussion, as well as methodological and terminological transparency, and the
fit of models to data and method. One of our current initiatives is the DLS Tool
Inventory, and an upcoming workshop at DH 2019 dedicated to the critical
assessment of widely used methods in DLS.

3

