Journal of
Cultural Analytics

January 31, 2020

Gender Dynamics and Critical
Reception: A Study of Early 20th-century
Book Reviews from The New York Times
Matthew J. Lavina
a

University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Peer-Reviewed By: Barbara Green, Matthew

This paper focuses on book reviews at the turn-of-the century United States in order to

Wilkens

underline fundamental compatibilities between large-scale, computational methods and

Article DOI: 10.22148/001c.11831

book historical approaches. It analyzes a dataset of approximately 2,800 book reviews

Dataverse DOI: 10.7910/DVN/C10VIQ
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549

published in The New York Times between January 1, 1905 and December 31, 1925. Several
machine learning scenarios are employed to investigate how the underlying reviews
constructed gendered norms for reading and readership. Logistic regression models are
trained and tested to evaluate how effectively lemma frequencies predict the perceived or
presumed gender of an author under review. The paper discusses four different feature
selection scenarios, as follows: (1) No terms removed, (2) Stop words removed, (3) Stop
words, gender nouns, and titles removed, and (4) Stop words, gender nouns, titles, and
common forenames removed. For each scenario, the top lemma coefficients are discussed
and interpreted. Tracing the norms (gendered and gendering) of The New York Times Book
Review in the early twentieth century demonstrates that even the summary-driven book
reviews played an important role in mediating hierarchies of taste and distinction. Further,
the paper seeks to demonstrate that cultural analytics methods can be used to investigate a
range of research questions related to authorship, publishing, circulation, and reception.

Now is a moment when a consumer can locate a review of Aristotle’s Poetics as
easily as a review of Black Panther, an Echo Dot, or the Grand Canyon. As a result,
it is perhaps easier than ever before to lose track of the review as a complex genre
with rich historical underpinnings. In fact, numerous distinct prototypes converged
over time to develop into the genre we recognize today. The Oxford English
Dictionary traces the usage of the term review meaning “an account or critical
appraisal of a book or (now also) a play, film, concert, etc.” to pamphlets as far back
as 1649. Lucien Febvre and Henri-Jean Martin write of “a whole series of
bibliographical journals” in the 17th century, followed by the Journal des Savants
(January 1665), which they describe as the first known periodical to include a

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

“review of recent publications.”1 Frank Donoghue describes the rise of the book
review during the 18th century against the backdrop of “a kind of limbo” between
“an age of substantial aristocratic support and the fully developed literary market of
the nineteenth century.”2 Michael Gavin, similarly, suggests that review magazines
“regularized and familiarized” criticism in the mid-18th century.3 Though associated
with the broader category of literary criticism, book reviews emerged as a distinct
subset of reader responses. In the nineteenth century, Joan Shelley Rubin argues,
large-scale changes in both production and distribution of books and periodicals
“partially enhanced the stature of the genteel critic,” but this growth in status was
relatively short-lived as, in the first decades of the twentieth century, genteel critics’
centrality began to decline.4 Janice Radway describes a generalized “anxiety about
the potential destruction of traditional culture in the wake of the transformations
effected by rapid social change.”5 Set against this backdrop, book reviews at the turn
of the twentieth century emerged as one site among many where contentious debates
about cultural capital were taking place.6
For the most part, there is consensus around these broad historical points, but much
of what we think we know about book reviews is based on close analysis of specific
examples, which have been elevated for one reason or another. Patrick Collier calls
for a better understanding of “what the object of knowledge is in modern periodical
studies” in order to avoid “a plethora of micro-studies that have incommensurate
aims and methods, are not speaking to each other, and thus are not contributing to
an overall understanding of how periodicals functioned within the cultural field at
the turn of the twentieth century, or of that cultural field itself.”7 Case studies have
a crucial role to play in cultural studies but, when taken in isolation, they are
especially vulnerable to what Andrew Piper calls “the problem of generalization,”
or the challenge of “how to move from part to whole.”8 Precisely how did the
changing norms of cultural valuation and prestige function for book reviews? How
did book reviews fit into a larger context of triangulations among cultural producers
and consumers? How were reviews of a particular work or author shaped by the
broader readership and reception landscapes associated with their work? What effect
did categorical norms have on the ways authors and texts were categorized, assessed,
and circulated? The large scale, computational methods of the burgeoning cultural
analytics subfield can help address questions like these.

2

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

What follows is an analysis of book reviews published in The New York Times
between January 1, 1905 and December 31, 1925. I have constructed a dataset of
approximately 2,800 documents for use with several machine learning scenarios to
investigate how the underlying reviews construct gendered norms for reading and
readership. I have taken up the question of how gender—a crucial categorical
norm—affected how authors and texts were described and evaluated. Tracing the
norms (gendered and gendering) of The New York Times Book Review in the early
twentieth century demonstrates that even the summary-driven book reviews—“a
collection of book reports to consumers on the readability of new titles” according
to Richard Kluger—played an important role in mediating hierarchies of taste and
distinction.9 I also hope to demonstrate, by example, how cultural analytics methods
can be used with documents like historical book reviews to investigate a range of
similar research questions.10

Scholarship on Turn-of-the-Century Culture and
Readership
For readers of Cultural Analytics, my work will appear most overtly in dialogue with
Ted Underwood, David Bamman, and Sabrina Lee’s “The Transformation of Gender
in English-Language Fiction.”11 Responding to “both the gender positions ascribed
to authors as biographical personages, and the signs of gender they used in producing
characters,” Underwood, Bamman, and Lee argue that an ostensibly paradoxical
shift has taken place between 1800 and the present day—first, that “gender divisions
between characters have become less sharply marked over the last 170 years” and
second, a “decline in the proportion of fiction actually written by women, which
drops by half (from roughly 50% of titles to roughly 25%) as we move from 1850 to
1950.”12 Underwood, Bamman, and Lee’s large scale study is provocative and
convincing. It does not engage, however, with book reception or the broader
landscape of paratexts—authorial and allographic—that most certainly mediated the
gender norms of English-language fiction between 1800 and the present day.13
Meanwhile, scholars in a periodical studies context have written extensively about
how distant reading can be best employed to analyze a range of content published in
periodicals. This body of scholarship is generally enthusiastic about the potential of

3

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

such intersections, and it raises several important notes of caution for future work.14
Applying supervised machine learning directly to large-scale corpora of book
reviews strikes me as an appealing area for continued convergence between cultural
analytics and periodical studies.15
In addition to speaking to some of the preoccupations of periodical studies, my
research question—how did New York Times book reviews between 1905 and 1925
describe published work in relation to perceived gender lines—revisits three
dominant preoccupations of previous scholarship on readership at the beginning of
the twentieth century: the exchange of economic and symbolic capital in a “field of
cultural production”; the disruption of cultural hierarchy in the construction of early
20th-century taste; and the historical feminization of particular cultural ideals.16
First, Pierre Bourdieu’s work on economic and symbolic capital attempts to explain
how authors, publishers, critics, readers, etc. engaged in symbolic struggles that, in
aggregate, shaped a “field of stylistic possibles” or “space of possibles.”17
Bourdieu’s Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, The Logic of
Practice, and Rules of Art: Genesis and Structure of the Literary Field are concerned
with issues that relate, directly or indirectly, to this subject. James English’s The
Economy of Prestige, Loren Glass’s Authors, Inc., and Mark McGurl’s The Program
Era, among others, demonstrate the applicability of Bourdieu’s framings to a U.S.
context. Allison et. al.’s “Quantitative Formalism: An Experiment,” Piper’s “How
Cultural Capital Works,” and Jurafsky et. al.’s “Linguistic Markers of Status in Food
Culture: Bourdieu’s Distinction in a Menu Corpus” exemplify an ongoing ambition
in digital humanities to interrogate and better understand the apparent cultural
mechanisms and structures of cultural valuation that Bourdieu initially described.
My work also revisits the broader concerns of a distinct cluster of studies of
readership that have engaged with historicizing the parameters of cultural hierarchy
at the turn-of-the-century, mostly in the United States and the United Kingdom.
Although many articles and books in this field have engaged with Bourdieu’s core
ideas, “middlebrow studies” has largely focused on the concept of middlebrow as a
referential keyword and a foregrounding concern.18 The term was not coined until
1925, and the degree to which the concept predated the term is a much larger debate
than I could address here. Initially, this scholarship was situated in relation to the
4

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

historic origin of the terms highbrow and lowbrow but the field has steadily widened.
As Cecilia Konchar Farr and Tom Perrin have argued, the field has grown to the
point that “we no longer feel, as we once did, that a gloss on the term middlebrow is
a vital component of any piece of writing on it.”19 My own work is not concerned
with the keyword middlebrow but does intersect with issues of cultural hierarchy
raised by others in this field. Two foundational works of middlebrow studies, in
particular, are crucial to the mapping of cultural hierarchy at the start of the twentieth
century: Radway’s A Feeling for Books: The Book-of-the-Month Club, Literary
Taste, and Middle-Class Desire and Rubin’s The Making of Middlebrow Culture.
Like others, Radway’s primary concern is whether cultural spaces between high and
low were permissible, and how the “values associated with one form of cultural
production were wed to forms and values usually connected with another.”20 She
argues that a preponderance of “how-and-what-to-read literature” in the late
nineteenth century argued the virtues of “reading as a goal-directed activity” and
positioned itself against cheap fiction, as well as “the sensual, somatic pleasures of
the body” associated with reading for enjoyment.21 Notions of middlebrow, she
argues, emerged from this utilitarian context. The “scandal of middlebrow,” Radway
writes, “was a function of its failure to maintain the fences of cordoning off culture
from commerce.”22 Although her work does not engage directly with the book
review as a form, it remains one of the most important and often cited touchstones
on the idea of middlebrow, as well as the pre-1925 logic of reading that no doubt
influenced The New York Times Book Review at the start of the twentieth century.
Rubin, in contrast, is directly concerned with the function of book reviews in the
early 20th-century United States. In this sense, Rubin’s work contributes to a larger
body of scholarship predating “distant reading” that studies book reviews
quantitatively or systematically.23 Rubin describes middlebrow as a series of cultural
mechanisms by which genteel values of the nineteenth century “survived and
prospered, albeit in chastened and redirected form, throughout the 1920s, 1930s, and
1940s.”24 According to Rubin, the “news” approach to book reviews was “virtually
the only mode of presentation in the daily press during the antebellum period.”25
These reviewers tended to allocate as much if not more column inches to book
summaries as they did to their evaluations. Their reviews often treated amusement
and edification as equally valid reasons for praise. In turn, Rubin argues, genteel
5

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

editors of monthlies and quarterlies were critical of the news approach to book
reviews for developing an overly close relationship with book publishers.26 Book
reviews’ primary exigencies—summarization and evaluation of published work—
represented an enticing space for many competing cultural principles to interact.
My analysis of book reviews in The New York Times engages with how cultural taste
was gendered at the turn of the twentieth century. Previous scholarship has
demonstrated convincingly that the rise of the mass market was deeply intertwined
with rapidly changing and ardently contested notions of manliness, masculinity,
womanhood, and femininity. Much of this work has tied feminization to the concept
of middlebrow, but it is widely argued that such feminization began well before the
term middlebrow was ever used. According to Jaime Harker, “Depending on the
context, ‘middlebrow’ can mean ‘middle class,’ ‘effeminate,’ ‘polluted by
commerce,’ ‘mediocre,’ or ‘sentimental.’”27 Beth Driscoll’s The New Literary
Middlebrow: Tastemakers and Reading in the Twenty-First Century locates gender
as one of eight interconnected characteristics “through the middlebrow of the
twentieth century to the new literary middlebrow of the twenty-first century.”28
Driscoll argues that middlebrow culture tends to be both “female and feminized,” as
it is “implicated in a wider pattern of gender discrimination that runs through the
literary field.”29 Radway, similarly, has argued that “the debate over books and
reading was a heavily gendered debate in the sense that cultural conservatives always
associated the threat of cheap fiction and passive reading with the dangers of
‘aimless,’ ‘indolent,’ and ‘ardent’ femininity.”30 Reading habits and other patterns
of cultural consumption were reconfigured along gender lines during the early years
of the twentieth century.

Dataset: Book Reviews and Metadata
As Maria DiCenzo has argued, even in a distant reading context, “reading periodicals
(closely or deeply) for their discursive and visual content … remains central to
research engaged in expanding historical and cultural fields.”31 The same, I and
others would argue, should apply for literary studies approaches to subjects like
genre and canon formation. To this end, I have endeavored to work with The New
York Times’ TimesMachine’s front end, and my underlying dataset, in equal

6

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

proportion. The New York Times Book Review was founded in 1896 as an eight-page
Saturday supplement. Prior to this, book reviews appeared in The New York Times
Sunday Magazine Supplement and in columns like “New Publications” in the news
section of the daily paper.32 Some reviews or announcements of prominent books
continued to appear in the news section even after 1896. Where the news section of
The New York Times was a seven-column broadsheet in 1896 and an eight-column
broadsheet after April 1, 1913, the book review supplement was a three-, four-, or
five-column tabloid, depending on the year. The Saturday supplement moved to
Sunday in 1911 and, between 1920 and 1922, it was titled The New York Times Book
Review and Magazine. After 1922, it became an increasingly respected component
of the Sunday edition of the New York Times, as many as 96 pages in length at its
height.33 From the outset, The New York Times Book Review followed previous
established norms by including publishing statements before review material, with
information such as the book title, reviewed author, reviewed author’s other books,
book format, publication place, publisher, number of pages, and book price.
Typographical markers like drop cap initials and book decorations were also
common accompaniments to content.34
The supplement consistently included reviews and non-review material, such as
features about well-known authors, coverage of prominent book auctions, letters
from readers, and literary gossip. Reviewed works were presented in several
different ways, including one review of many books, recurring features like “Latest
Works of Fiction” that clustered reviews together but offset each book with its own
publishing statement, and single-author, single-book reviews, a minority of which
were signed by well-known reviewers. Artwork occasionally appeared with a
review, and author photographs became increasingly common over time, especially
for highlighted authors. By the 1920s, artwork was integral to The New York Times
Book Review’s page design.35
The book reviews for my analysis are drawn from a larger set of approximately
27,000 pieces of content published in The New York Times Book Review between
January 1, 1905 and December 31, 1925. In addition to covering The New York
Times Book Review during crucial years of development, this date range targets the
period when the news approach to book reviews, according to Rubin, was the
dominant norm. I downloaded metadata for these articles using The New York Times
7

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

Article Search API and used contextual clues (such as a $ in the headline and page
number BR1-BR25) to generate an initial list of potential single-work reviews. I then
culled this list by setting aside non-review content, very short reviews, reviews
comprised primarily of quoted material from the reviewed work, and multi-book
reviews. Multi-book reviews can be further split into two distinct groups: a single
review of many books, or a scanned pdf that is actually a cluster of several reviews,
treated as one unit either deliberately or inadvertently.36 For each review, I handcoded a gender label to describe the assumed gender of the author of the reviewed
work. A review that referred to an author as “he” or “Mr. Smith” was labeled
“assumed male,” and a review calling the reviewed work’s author “she” or “Mrs.
Smith” was labeled “assumed female.” Throughout this article, I have used the
phrases “male-labeled-reviews” and “female-labeled-reviews” to describe these
groups. If a reviewed work had multiple authors perceived as a mix of genders, it
was labeled “multi” and, in the less frequent cases when a reviewer avoided the
language of gender altogether, it was labeled “unknown.”37 However, multi-labeled
reviews and unknown-labeled-reviews were removed from the training and test sets
for the purposes of this article.
In the interests of procedural transparency, I want to describe some pertinent details
about how review text was processed in preparation for machine learning. Johanna
Drucker has argued, “Designing a text-analysis program is necessarily an
interpretative act, not a mechanical one, even if running the program becomes
mechanistic.”38 Although many of Drucker’s generalizations are subject to debate,
the interplay of rule-based text processing techniques and interpretive judgments that
she describes is an integral feature of quantitative hermeneutics. For this study,
optical character recognition (OCR) text was used for all computations.39 A natural
language processing library was used to remove punctuation, tokenize, and
lemmatize.40 Lemmatization, which combines inflections like charm and charms
into one token (called a lemma), is not thought to be necessary in text classification
and may in some cases even reduce classification accuracy slightly, but it can make
term coefficient results more readable by reducing what essentially seem to be repeat
terms. To remove as many OCR errors from the model as possible, I also employed
automated spellchecking.41 Relative lemma frequencies were weighted by inverse
document frequency (TF-IDF).42

8

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Three limitations to the scope of this study should be noted. First, I do not claim that
the reviews analyzed in this study represent broader trends in book review language.
Rather, I hope that a larger sample of reviews (with comparable metadata) from
various periodicals will be developed. Second, I deliberately limit my discussion of
the identities of book reviewers in this article. Forming conclusions on this subject
would also require a larger historical sample, as most reviews in The New York Times
at this time were published without crediting a review author. Finally, I do not wish
to make claims about the “objective” or “ground truth” of the genders or sexes of
authors discussed in these reviews, nor do I endorse the idea that gender must be
described in such essentializing terms. My goal here is to trace evidence of gendering
in review language, not to use reviews to predict gender for information gathering
purposes.
In their introduction to a special issue of Feminist Modernist Studies on “Feminist
Modernist Digital Humanities,” Amanda Golden and Cassandra Laity argue, “Until
recently, DH has been prominently associated with scientiﬁc neutrality, ‘big data,’
quantiﬁcation and the ensuing practices of distant reading or macroanalysis.”43
Although I think this charge against digital humanities is overstated, I share the
concern that “purportedly ‘objective’ knowledge systems can and do inscribe
exclusionary, hierarchical assumptions.”44 My work resists the assertion that cultural
analytics methods necessitate binary thinking, overconfidence, or disavowal of their
own limitations. At the same time, I embrace Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren
Klein’s perspective that “the double-edged sword of data shows just how important
it is to understand how structures of power and privilege operate in the world.”45
Following and building on prior scholarship by Matt Jockers and Gabi Kirilloff; Eve
Kraicer and Andrew Piper; Susan Brown and Laura Mandell; Richard Jean So, Hoyt
Long, and Yuancheng Zhu; and Underwood, Bamman, and Lee, my work seeks to
adopt a binary, temporarily, as a way to interrogate it.46 Cultural analytics can do
more to interrogate and historicize categories like gender, as well as trace how these
categories were socially constructed.

9

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

Methods: Logistic Regression and Feature Coefficients
Regularized logistic regression is a well-established machine learning method that
many digital humanities or cultural analytics practitioners have employed.47 Texts
(in this case book reviews) are divided into a train and test set. Reviews in the
training set are used to build a machine learning model (logistic regression) and a
series of predictions for the book reviews in the test set are generated. The overall
performance of the model is then evaluated by comparing each prediction to its
corresponding hand-coded gender label. For these tests, I included only “assumed
male” and “assumed female” reviews in the training and test sets, as logistic
regression is designed for binary classification. Running a logistic regression with a
small dataset of gender-tagged book reviews can immediately answer two questions:
1. Using book review language as machine learning features, how well can a
logistic regression model predict the presumed gender of a book’s author?
2. Which features are the most “useful” (i.e., provide the most information) in
making these predictions?
The first of these questions is addressed by running predictions and evaluating the
results, though several factors can complicate how we interpret a model’s overall
performance. First, an unequal presence of male and female labels must be
considered. The book reviews dataset I assembled contains 2,173 male-labeledreviews and 715 female-labeled-reviews, a ratio of approximately 3 to 1. This count
makes for a striking portrait of gender imbalances, and it likely downplays gender
disparities in The New York Times at this time. This ratio was only achieved after
female-labeled-reviews were oversampled to ensure at least 20 samples for each
represented year. For my start and end years (1905 and 1925), I conducted a full
inventory of single-work book reviews and found ratios closer to 6:1.48
To establish stable performance baselines, I have retrained each model using hold
out cross-validation with resampling of 1,000 different randomized training set and
test set membership combinations. Unlike a k-fold cross-validation or leave-one-out
cross-validation, such resampling can represent performance metrics, such as
precision, recall, and F1 scores, using measures of central tendency against a
backdrop of a normally distributed range of results. 49 (Figures 1a and 1b demonstrate
10

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

such aggregated F1 scores.) To obtain still more information about the factors
affecting performance, as well as the categories of language that best predict gender,
I re-examined my research question using four feature selection scenarios (Table 1).

Figure 1a. Distribution of F1 Scores (1,000 Reshuffles) for Male Labels in Scenario 1 (Mean: 89.91; Standard
Deviation: 0.011)

Figure 1b. Distribution of F1 Scores (1,000 Reshuffles) for Female Labels in Scenario 1 (Mean: 77.58; Standard
Deviation: 0.025)

11

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

Scenario 1
No terms removed
Scenario 2
Stop words removed
Scenario 3
Stop words, gender nouns, and titles removed
Scenario 4
Stop words, gender nouns, titles, and common forenames removed
Table 1. Machine Learning Feature Selection Scenarios

Logistic regression is a preferred machine learning model for a study like this one
partly because the rules used to make predictions are transparent. A model trained
on term frequencies to predict whether a book reviewer regards the book’s author as
male or female generates numerical equations that score the likelihood of maleness
and femaleness using the assumption that some terms’ frequencies will correlate
with this prediction. A model’s coefficient scores provide an indication of how much
importance each training feature was found to have, although how much a particular
feature’s coefficient score affects a given prediction is a more complicated
question.50
With this study, I have taken the additional step of aggregating coefficient scores
over all training set and set test reshuffles. A feature appearing on the top of the
aggregated coefficient list is the feature with the greatest mean coefficient, and the
relative stability of that feature can be described using measures of central tendency.
(Figure 2 demonstrates this stability with the example of the term her.) Throughout
this paper, I will discuss lemma features that repeatedly and consistently informed
gender label predictions.

Figure 2. Distribution of Coefficient Probabilities for “her” (1,000 reshuffles) for Scenario 1 (Mean: 3.82; Standard
Deviation: 0.094)

12

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

As the “Results” section of this article will show, an initial inspection of term
coefficients suggests that surface level terms—e.g., pronouns, gendered nouns,
gendered titles, and forenames—are strong predictors of gender. In my view, these
seemingly innocuous terms are crucial to understanding how book reviews engage
in gender making; additionally, machine learning can help isolate terms associated
with the content of the books reviewed and the reviewer’s evaluation of a book,
which is more difficult for a human reader to do consistently. In my attempts to find
features that scholars focusing on the gendering of cultural taste might deem
qualitatively meaningful, I focused on isolating and removing categories of features
with overt gendered content.

Results: Model Performance and Term Coefficients
The Scenario 1 model considering all lemma features from the underlying dataset of
book reviews can be configured to predict the assumed gender of the reviewed
work’s author with accuracy rates between 78% and 90% and a mean accuracy of
86.1% (0.015 std). Recall and precision rates were higher for male-labeled-reviews
even though two steps were taken to keep the model as balanced as possible. Table
2 summarizes performance measures for all four feature set scenarios. Performance
is benchmarked with F1, precision, and recall scores for male and female labels, as
well as overall accuracy measures. The model uses class weighting to maintain
approximate parity between female and male recall rates despite the fact that malelabeled-reviews outnumbered female-labeled-reviews.
Scenario
1
2

Features Removed

F1
(F)
0.776
0.712

Precision
(F)
0.773
0.687

Recall
(F)
0.781
0.743

F1
(M)
0.899
0.863

None
Stop words
Stop words, gender
nouns, and gendered
3
titles
0.593
0.551
0.649
0.793
Stop words, gender
nouns, gendered titles,
4
and forenames
0.581
0.538
0.638
0.786
Table 2. F1, Precision, Recall, and Accuracy Scores by Gender for Scenarios 1-4

13

Precision
(M)
0.901
0.881

Recall
(M)
0.897
0.848

86.10%
81.50%

0.829

0.762

72.60%

0.823

0.754

71.70%

Accuracy

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

As one might expect, the predictive strength of the model decreases as directly
gendered terms are removed (in steps over Scenarios 2, 3, and 4). At the same time,
the regression generates a more robust predictor of male labels than female labels,
even after class balancing is imposed to keep the labels relatively similar to one
another. In fact, as gender pronouns, gendered titles, and common forenames are
removed, precision and recall rates decline more steeply for female-labeled-reviews
than for male-labeled-reviews.51 These performance metrics establish an interpretive
baseline. The model has more male-labeled-reviews than female-labeled-reviews to
work with, so it comes as no shock that categorical predictions for each label differ;
yet, if the model could find no underlying categorical patterns, no amount of
additional data would improve the model’s predictive accuracy. In this model, more
data leads to better performance, which is a general sign of robustness.
Coefficient scores for each scenario suggest several patterns. For Scenario 1, the top
coefficients associated with female-labeled-reviews are terms like her, she, mrs,
miss and woman. The information provided by categories of words is at least
partially hierarchical: stop words have the highest coefficients (removed in Scenario
2), followed by gendered nouns and titles (removed in Scenario 3), and then
forenames (removed in Scenario 4). After all these categories have been removed,
child, story, novel, heroine, and home have the highest coefficient scores. For male
labels, his, mr, the, of, and that are the top coefficients before any categories of
features are held out (Scenario 1). Male-gendered nouns (boy, man) and forenames
do not inform predictions of male labels, though honorifics like dr, prof, and
professor are associated with male-labeled-reviews. By Scenario 4, dr, british,
volume, essay, and prof have the highest coefficient scores, though some of these
top terms are noticeable as early as Scenario 2. Tables 3a-3d list the top five term
coefficients predicting male and female labels for each machine learning scenario.
Female Label Coefficients

Male Label Coefficients

Term

Score

Term

Score

Her

4.78

His

2.07

She

3.82

Mr

1.73

Mrs

2.12

The

1.08

Miss

1.51

Of

0.78

Woman
1.23
That
Table 3a. Top Coefficients for Scenario 1

0.49

14

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Female Label Coefficients

Male Label Coefficients

Term

Score

Term

Score

Mrs

3.32

Professor

0.74

Miss

2.28

Dr

0.63

Woman

2.1

Prof

0.54

Girl

0.94

British

0.54

Mother
0.92
Volume
Table 3b. Top Coefficients for Scenario 2

Female Label Coefficients

0.51

Male Label Coefficients

Term

Score

Term

Score

Child

1.1

Dr

0.65

Story

0.98

British

0.61

Novel

0.88

Prof

0.57

Heroine

0.84

Volume

0.56

Love
0.82
Essay
Table 3c. Top Coefficients for Scenario 3

0.53

Female Label Coefficients

Male Label Coefficients

Term

Score

Term

Score

Child

1.19

Dr

0.67

Story

1.06

British

0.64

Novel

0.96

Volume

0.61

Heroine

0.95

Essay

0.58

Home
0.81
Prof
Table 3d. Top Coefficients for Scenario 4

0.52

Interpretation of Results
In this section, I want to raise three aspects of these results that connect to gendering
in book reviews, as well as mediating hierarchies of taste. First, I want to return to
Scenario 1 (which includes gendered personal pronouns, common forenames, and
gendered titles like “Mr.” and “Mrs.”) to discuss terms that would otherwise seem
mundane. Second, I examine the trends of reviewed books that emerge from these
results, with particular attention to book subject matter that seems to split most
clearly by gender. Such bifurcation reinforced a notion of discrete gender spheres at
a time when much if not most literature by women was working to complicate or
15

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

blur such separations. Third, I advance the idea that a distinct set of gendering
features related to authorship, genre, and process can be extrapolated from these
results, and that these terms connect gendering to the work of cultural mediation.
Stop Words, Pronouns, Honorifics, and Forenames as Predictors of Gender
As much of this essay already suggests, book reviews have specific exigencies that
may restrict how gender is portrayed, including norms for how the plot and the
author of the reviewed work are discussed. A book reviewer encounters a book
attributed to a proper name and makes inferences based on prior knowledge,
guesswork, or some mixture of the two. The rules of inference are historically
dependent; reviewers most likely believed they could determine authors’ “true”
genders by making normative inferences. As Barbara Hochman argues, nineteenth
century custom was supportive of “reading for the author.” Direct address (e.g.
“Dear reader”) was common in fiction, and authors’ identities were often assumed
based on the subjects they wrote about. Over time, however, “Amid growing
uncertainty about how to conceptualize an author’s relation to book and reader,
many novelists imagined the act of reading itself as a hostile attempt to ‘get at’ the
withheld figure concealed behind the words on the page.”52 A known persona may
come to mind when an author’s proper name is invoked, which would no doubt
inform a reviewer’s assumptions; yet, inevitably, authorial figures were described in
relation to a broader ideas about categories, including but not limited to masculinity
and femininity.
Turning to the coefficients for Scenario 1, it may seem inconsequential or obvious
that an author’s gender can be predicted by examining the frequency of terms like
her, she, mrs, miss, woman, his, mr, the, of, and that in a book review. I included
such terms in the first scenario, however, to demonstrate that deceptively simple
terms can convey gender in unexpected ways. Notably, in this set of models, female
gendered pronouns have higher coefficient scores than male gendered pronouns.
Male-labeled-reviews, in contrast, are more readily associated with non-gendered
function words. The linguistic norms of turn-of-the-century book reviews echo what
de Beauvoir observed, that “being a man is not a particularity” to men—“[woman]
determines and differentiates herself in relation to man, and he does not in relation
to her; she is the inessential in front of the essential.”53 It is possible that these results
16

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

are affected by the authorship signal of book reviewers, since, as Koppel, Argamon,
and Shimoni have noted, male and female authors tend to use certain high frequency
function words in predictably different ways.54 However, the available metadata for
my study suggests that reviewers between 1905 and 1925 were mostly men. This
was true for reviews of books by assumed men and books by assumed women.55 As
a result, it seems unlikely that male and female reviewers writing in different ways
would account for these results. Directly gendering female pronouns and gendered
titles set in contrast to ostensibly non-gendered pronouns and titles seem to have
contributed to a set of rhetorical framings that sanctioned men and women as
different kinds of authors.
These patterns are especially meaningful when we consider their presence in texts
like book reviews. The interplay of ostensibly obvious words frames what Bourdieu
describes as the habitus and hexis of gender. For Bourdieu, habitus is a “set of
dispositions which generates practices and perceptions” learned as early as
childhood, which creates a “second nature” that shapes behavior.56 Hexis is a
specific, bodily instantiation of this habituation: “what is ‘learned by body’ is not
something that one has, like knowledge that can be brandished, but something that
one is.”57 A category like gender is inscribed, bodily, beginning at a young age, and
is “inseparable from a relation to language and to time.”58 Gender norms, like norms
in other categories, are established in what Bourdieu would call a “space of
possibles” that textual representations—along with other constructors of social
meaning like individual, bodily acts and broader sets of group behavior—are
continually reinforcing and revising over time.59 Book reviews, especially those
taking the so-called news approach, present themselves as banal guides to particular
texts but contribute to the habitus with every iteration.
Interpreting Indications of Book Subject Matter
The regression results from Scenario 4 seem to suggest a relationship between
assumed gender and the subject matter of reviewed books. Before I proceed with
discussing how these trends may have played out, I want to emphasize that drawing
interpretive conclusions from term or lemma lists can be especially problematic. As
various schools of lexical and semantic linguistics (before and after the
poststructuralist turn) have maintained, individual terms acquire meaning in the
17

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

context of an intricate network of term-topic associations.60 When coefficient lists
are viewed, associations come to mind, but some of these associations are more
complex than they might first appear. Contextual differences such as part-of-speech,
word sense, and metaphorical usage have been conflated into one label, and
lemmatization adds yet another level of reduction in this case. The hazards of
forming conclusions from bag-of-words models are perhaps best articulated by Ben
Schmidt, who cautions that the popularity of topic modelling is based on “a set of
assumptions that are only partially true”—first, that co-occurring terms, “will
therefore have a number of things in common” and second, that “if a topic appears
at the same rate in two different types of documents, it means essentially the same
thing in both.”61 Like Schmidt, I would argue that these navigational complexities
do not preclude deriving interpretive conclusions from bag-of-words patterns.
Rather, term co-occurrence “neither can nor should be studied independently of a
deep engagement in the actual word counts that build them.”62 In the context of a
book review, it may be tempting to assume a word describes an author, a book, a
character in the book, or something else, but lemmas are potentially composed of
descriptions at many or even all of these levels.
Exploring all coefficients comprehensively becomes impractical even at a scale of a
few thousand short documents, since each lemma can appear in hundreds of reviews
and that lemma may appear in many sentences in one review. Using the regression
settings from Scenario 4, I hand-divided coefficients into several recognizable “first
pass” groupings (Tables 4 and 5). I intend for these labels to provide a birds-eye
view of a much more complex constellation of term usage in individual reviews. I
grant that a different person might use different labels, or create any number of
subgroups, and I do not mean to suggest that the words I grouped together co-occur
in particular reviews. There might be many reviews of books where government is
discussed and, quite separately, many reviews of books with some mention of the
law. In turn, a word like fact or essay could be closely associated with terms like law
or history. I present these groupings as heuristic constructions shaped by my
subjective judgment, but also informed by examining the reviews directly.

18

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Category

Lemmas (alphabetized)

Author and Text

Book, character, fiction, heroine, letter, novel, picture, plot, story
Background, child, custom, family, home, house, household, queen, social, society,
widow

Domestic and Social
Feminized Virtues
Marriage and
Courtship

Charming, clever, dear, feminine, friend, life, little, lovely, young

Time

Day, year

Economic Class

Labor, poor

Handsome, heart, marriage, married, meet, romance

Other
Come, color, know, lace, moor, real, type, vivid, want, wear, Wharton
Table 4. Interpretive Groupings for Female-Leaning Coefficients (Top 50 Lemmas)
Category

Lemmas (alphabetized)

Author and Text

Drama, essay, paper, play, translation, volume

Conquest and War

Army, battle, captain, empire, general, military, sea, ship

Geographic Locales
Scholarship and
Science
Government and
Policy

British, Germany, Japanese

Procedural

Fact, history, lie, opinion, present, second, series

College, dr, prof, science, scientific, Shakespeare, theory, university
Constitution, government, law, nation, national, policy, political, president, state, united

Uncategorized
Business, economic, fr, ill, jame, mile, sir
Table 5. Interpretive Groupings for Male-Leaning Coefficients (Top 50 Lemmas)

The observed term-category patterns depicted in Tables 4 and 5, while certainly
informed by complexities of usage, are stable across many different training and test
partitions and suggestive of potential connections. To contextualize some of my
label choices, I derived statistics for each lemma, including: gendered document
frequency of each lemma, term frequencies for each word contributing to the
lemma’s frequency grouped by part-of-speech tag, and the number of total synsets
in Wordnet associated with each word/part-of-speech combination.63 For example,
the lemma child is found in 700 documents in the corpus; 36% of all female-labeledreviews; and 24% of all male-labeled-reviews. The words child, children, and childs
are lemmatized to child, and the terms combined have four part-of-speech variants,
as listed below (Table 6).64

19

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

Word

Part of Speech

Frequency

Child

Noun

622

Child

Verb

1

Children

Noun

792

Childs
Noun
1
Table 6. Words and Part-of-Speech Counts for the Lemma ‘child’

In this example, three of the four terms are associated with the same four synsets:
1. child.n.01, “a young person of either sex”
2. child.n.02, “a human offspring (son or daughter) of any age”
3. child.n.03, “an immature childish person”
4. child.n.04, “a member of a clan or tribe”
The combination of term, part-of-speech, and synset data for the lemma child
suggests an especially stable set of terms and potential uses. All but one root term
seems to be used as a noun. There are only four synsets, and all four synsets are
closely related. I placed it in the category “Domestic and Social” because of its
association with families, but it could also be associated with biographies, children’s
literature, or (at least in theory) a derisive statement about an author.
In contrast to child, the lemma play appears in 681 documents, 25% of male-labeled
reviews, and 20% of female-labeled-reviews. The lemma represents play, plays,
playing, and played, and its part-of-speech variants are listed below (Table 7).
Word

Part of Speech

Frequency

Play

Noun

494

Played

Verb

263

Play

Verb

263

Plays

Noun

230

Playing

Verb

92

Plays

Verb

83

Table 7. Words and Part-of-Speech Counts for the Lemma ‘play’

20

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Further, these forms of the lemma play are associated with 52 synsets, 35 nouns and
17 verbs. Compared to most of the coefficients, play represents a broad range of
potential uses. At the same time, the terms play and plays, tagged as nouns, are
combined more frequently than the variants tagged as verbs, and a quick look at
review headlines shows results, like “Shakespeare’s Poems,” “Bernard Shaw’s
Latest,” “Seven Plays by Americans,” and “Drama Victorian and Modern,” so I
placed the lemma under the label “Author and Text,” despite its clear complexities
in usage.65
In the regression results, female-labeled-reviews use terms more readily associated
with domestic and social settings, marriage and courtship, and historically feminized
qualities like charm and loveliness. The lemma charming, in this model, represents
only the word charming (and not charm, charmed, or charmer), and it appears in
190 reviews. 214 uses are tagged as adjectives, and only nine are tagged as nouns.
The lemma has one primary usage and meaning, yet there is still room for
complexity. As one review of Dorothy Canfield Fisher’s Understood Betsy suggests,
“There are some charming pictures of the simple, wholesome country life.”66 This
reference to charming refers to Canfield’s pictures of country life. In contrast, a
review of Julia Ward Howe’s biography, written by her daughters, states, “When
[Howe] and her two sisters grew up, so lovely and charming were they that they
were known as ‘The Three Graces of Bond Street.’”67 This use of the adjective
charming refers to Howe’s personality. The presence of a lemma like charming
could come from the review’s description of the author’s writing (as with Fisher),
the biographical subject (as with Howe), or some other aspect of a book altogether.
In the broadest possible sense, all of these uses are more likely to appear in reviews
of books by those perceived as women in the aggregate, and that larger pattern is
one example of what would remain invisible without cultural analytics methods.
A gloss of the lemmas I have grouped under “domestic and social,” “feminized
virtues,” and “marriage and courtship” suggests the entanglement of gendered
subject matter and gendering descriptions. The individual lemmas for child, heroine,
home, marriage, family, and young are all in the top ten coefficients. It could be the
case that lemmas associated with reviewed books’ subject matter are more likely to
coincide with gender, but this is difficult to say because there is no static, objective
line between a subject matter lemma and a descriptive lemma. Male-labeled-reviews
21

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

seem to favor lemmas associated with demonstrations of power and prestige, but that
broad association seems to include subject matter and something more. The lemma
state, which I have grouped under “Government and Policy,” is associated with the
noun state, as well as entities like the United States and Secretary of State. The
lemma appears in 989 reviews (37% of male-labeled-reviews and about 26% of
female-labeled-reviews). It is associated with seven word/part-of-speech pairings,
yet the nouns state and states represent 2,126 occurrences, whereas the verbs state,
states, stated and stating combine to represent 241 occurrences. As a review of Sir
Alfred Lyall’s authorized biography of Lord Dufferin (governor general of Canada
from 1872 to 1878) describes, “There was a strong element of the Canadian
government almost fanatically loyal to Great Britain, but multitudes looked for
independence or union with the United States as the natural destiny of the Dominion.
… It is not too much to say that the personality of Dufferin was instrumental in
bringing about a change of sentiment and opinion.”68 This text demonstrates how
various references to multiple uses of state might intertwine, along with related
terms like statesman and statecraft, both of which are mentioned in the review. More
generally, the lemmas for british, state, nation, political, law, government, and
president are all among the top twelve coefficients, which suggests in the most
general sense that these likely subject matter keywords are more frequent among
male-labeled-reviews.
I want to emphasize the potential significance of these results to literary studies in
particular. Many traditional literary studies approaches to feminism at the turn of the
twentieth century have suggested that the decades between 1900 and 1930 were
crucial in breaking down the doctrine of separate spheres.69 Other computational
scholars have found word-level predictors for authors’ or characters’ gender in
fiction that seem to echo and confirm these findings, but such studies have almost
exclusively focused on 19th-century bifurcations. Matthew L. Jockers’s work on
gender and authorial identity in Macroanalysis; Jockers and David Mimno’s
“Significant Themes in 19th-century Literature”; and Jockers and Kirilloff’s
“Understanding Gender and Character Agency in the 19th Century Novel” all
discuss “the valorization of passive, domestic female behavior” in fiction, but they
restrict their analysis to texts published before 1900.70 Underwood, Bamman, and
Lee, whose work traces character descriptions in a corpus that covers 1800-1980,
observe that, “gendering of privacy and interiority was linked to a broader division
22

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

between public and domestic spaces.”71 However, term frequencies separating
character gender such as mind, spirit, passion, chamber, country all converge by
1900; and terms such as heart and room begin with demonstrable associations to the
feminine and become less associated with femininity. Broadly, they conclude, “it
would appear that genres themselves were becoming less strongly gendered.”72
Reviews in The New York Times, in direct contrast to all of these articles, tell a story
of women writing more fiction than men, and the doctrine of separate spheres alive
and thriving. Piper and So argue that reviews in The New York Times Book Review
between 2000 and 2016 “essentially reproduced the public/private split bequeathed
to us from the nineteenth century”; perhaps this split has remained consistent in book
reviews for more than 100 years.73
I do not mean to suggest that Bamman, Jockers, Kirilloff, Lee, Mimno, and
Underwood are incorrect in what they report. Rather, this large set of book reviews
covers a 20-year period and probably distorts the trends one is likely to find by
looking directly at a corpus of novels from the same time period. What The New
York Times Book Review reviewed or opted not to review, along with how their
reviews tended to describe books, are probable factors in this distortion, as if literary
history has been reflected in a fun house mirror. Nevertheless, this example can
remind practitioners in cultural analytics, and in literary studies, that direct
examination of published fiction and nonfiction and examination of authorial and
allographic paratexts can suggest very different interpretations. This points to the
potential shortfalls of analyzing either one without considering the other, and it
speaks to the importance of modeling authorship, production, circulation, and
reception when doing the work of literary history.

23

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

Interpreting Authorship, Genre, and Process Terms
Presumably, the differences in gender norms that I have observed between reviews
and novels from the same time period are a result of some combination of trends
pertaining to book selection, book summarization, and book evaluation. For one, my
dataset includes reviews of fiction and nonfiction, so the gendering of subject matter
could be more pronounced in nonfiction, which would inform the domestic-romantic
and war-scholarship-government bifurcations I have discussed. Further, newspapers
may have been more likely to publish bestsellers and, as Underwood, Bamman, and
Lee note, 31% to 42% of such bestsellers were by women between 1900 and 1930
(with a peak of 42% in 1930 before a long, slow descent).
More hand encoding by genre might shed some light on these questions, but Scenario
4 regression results provide an indication that genre affects book review gendering,
since male and female authors are associated with distinct sets of authorial or
publishing industry terms. Under the title “Author and Text,” the lemmas book,
character, fiction, heroine, letter, novel, picture, plot, and story bend the model’s
prediction toward female-labeled-reviews. These terms suggest references to
storytelling strategies, especially in the context of fiction. “Author and Text” lemmas
associated with female-labeled-reviews have higher coefficient scores, on average,
than any of the apparent subject matter groupings. Term divisions for fiction and
novel, in particular, suggest that The New York Times was reviewing more fiction by
women than fiction by men, and/or more nonfiction by men than nonfiction by
women. When compared with the Scenario 1 lemma counts for she (Figure 3), it
might be more difficult to estimate the cut-off for fiction or novel (Figures 4 and 5)
that would best split the data into “mostly male” and “mostly female” groupings.74
Yet the regression model suggests that, as the counts for both of these terms increase,
so does the probability of the review having a female label.

24

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Figure 3. Scatter Plot of Counts for ‘she’ Colored by Gender Label

Figure 4. Scatter Plot of Counts for ‘fiction’ Colored by Gender Label

25

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

Figure 5. Scatter Plot of Counts for ‘novel’ Colored by Gender Label

For male-labeled-reviews, lemmas such as drama, essay, paper, play, translation,
and volume have high coefficient scores. Coefficient scores for “Author and Text”
lemmas associated with male-labeled-reviews are comparable to any of the subject
matter groupings I have already discussed. In my qualitative categories, I have also
added a category called “Procedural,” which includes the lemmas fact, history, lie,
opinion, present, second, and series. Each of these lemmas could, to some degree,
raise an image of a reviewer discussing an author’s general approach or specific
choices. Many of these lemmas suggest associations with nonfiction, or a reviewer’s
response to it, and this generalization is consistent with the fact that female-labeledreviews do not seem to have a counterpart category. Taken together, these results
provide reason to think that male-labeled-reviews are more closely linked to drama,
nonfiction, recurring series, and gatekeeper functions, as well as multi-text series
and new editions of prior work.
Largely because of the preponderance of “Procedural” terms, overall, regression
coefficients for male-labeled-reviews appear more abstract than female-labeledreview coefficients. In other words, even in largely summary-driven reviews, we can
observe patterns that suggest the gendering of concreteness and abstraction, with
26

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

male-labeled-reviews retaining a kind of privilege over female-labeled-reviews. In
these reviews, authors perceived as male may be more often granted rhetorical space
to disappear into their ideas and opinions. In a book review context specifically, this
kind of privilege seems immediately relevant to the curatorial and mediating role
that male authors and critics were so often granted. Read against this context,
lemmas related to scholarship, academia, science, history, and economics may
further suggest a male-dominated symbiosis among higher education, publishing,
and book review apparatus. A larger sample could say even more about this pattern,
especially if reviews from additional periodicals were included, but these results
alone point to clear norms for male and female authorship across two decades of
book reviews in The New York Times.

Concluding Remarks on Middlebrow Culture
I began this article by expressing two goals for this analysis of book reviews
published in The New York Times between 1905 and 1925:
(1) To demonstrate that even this newspaper’s summary-driven book reviews
played an important role in gendering reviewed authors, partly by gendering
subject matter and genre norms, and partly by gendering the work of mediating
taste and distinction.
(2) To show the potential of using large-scale, corpus-based analysis of historical
book reviews and other paratexts to revisit additional cultural analytics research
questions.
To accomplish the first of these goals, I have focused on how machine learning
classification can point to gendered patterns in both subject matter and structural
vocabularies of book reviews. Assumed female authorship is associated with
lemmas that suggest domestic settings, romance and marriage plots, and a
constellation of feminized values. These differences of subject matter, in particular,
suggest a culture of non-authorial paratexts mediating and reinforcing a sense of
division between “what men write about” and “what women write about” that has
not been observed when primary texts such as novels were analyzed using large
scale, computational methods. Assumed male authorship is associated with lemmas
that may imply subject matter like the military, government, academia, and status.
Female-labeled-reviews are likely to have a greater number of lemmas associated
27

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

with fiction, whereas male-labeled-reviews are likely to have a greater number of
lemmas associated with essays, plays, and series. Finally, lemmas reminiscent of
cultural curation and remediation are associated with male-labeled-reviews.
According to Driscoll, middlebrow suggests a specific constellation of values: “The
literary middlebrow is middle-class, reverential towards high culture, and
commercial; it is feminized, emotional, recreational, mediated, and earnest.”75 Part
of Driscoll’s point is that, over time, the various aspects of what we now call
middlebrow became associated with one another, such that we would expect to see
the work of mediation becoming feminized, but this effect does not seem present in
this particular corpus.
Going further, terms associated with commercialization do not appear in the subject
matter and structural coefficient lists for the machine learning scenarios above
(Tables 4 and 5). Some overtly commercial terms may not have been used very often
in book reviews, but a direct examination of coefficients for a few lemmas such as
bargain, buy, cheap, expensive, and frivolous suggests otherwise. In fact, bargain,
buy, and cheap are all marginally associated with male labels ( 0.091, 0.099, and
0.092), and expensive and frivolous are both marginally associated with female
labels (0.082, 0.11). Meanwhile, the lemma pleasure, which Radway frames as a
proxy for a certain kind of reading, has a slightly stronger female-label-informing
coefficient (0.17). Radway’s argument, that some objected to or feared the ease with
which certain texts or modes of production (like the Harvard Classics) transgressed
social and rhetorical boundaries separating culture and commerce, may be relevant
here. Perhaps book reviews were more likely to cross these boundaries without
making direct reference to commercial language. Rubin has argued convincingly
that the book review was an implicitly commercial genre by the turn of the century,
due to its close ties to publishing and bookselling. Indications of gendered
differences in the subject matter of reviewed books suggest that book reviews
published in The New York Times between 1905 and 1925 followed the news
approach, and in this sense my results echo one of Rubin’s points. However, even
the summary-heavy reviews in The New York Times show evidence that, behind a
veneer of neutrality, gender norms were being established, parameterized, and linked
to taste-making.

28

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

This paper’s secondary objective, as described in my introduction, was to
demonstrate that large scale analysis of book reviews has the potential to go further
and do more. The cultural norming I have discussed is an effective example of the
analytical work that might be undertaken, I believe, because there are clear
compatibilities between prior work and the kinds of patterns that large scale analysis
of book reviews is likely to reveal. In turn, existing scholarship on cultural mediation
has evocative connections to broader questions of authorship, readership, and
symbolic capital. The full range of cultural analytics research questions that large
scale analysis of book reviews might supplement or reshape is, for now, a matter of
speculation. Better developed metadata could enable questions about how review
language norms differed based on the review’s author, the genre of the reviewed
work, book prices, or book publishers. With a still wider corpus of more periodicals,
these analytical methods have the potential to address Collier’s call for a better
understanding of the object of knowledge at the center of periodical studies, and to
make smaller scale studies speak more directly to one another. These inquiries could
be widened to compare book reviews to other types of reader response and literary
criticism, or to trace patterns between reviews and the stylistic features of the books
they respond to. As is the case with so many topics in cultural analytics, possibilities
abound.

NOTES
1

Lucien Febvre, and Henri-Jean Martin, The Coming of the Book: The Impact of Printing 1450-1800, trans. David
Gerard (New Left Books, 1976), 235.
2

Frank Donoghue, The Fame Machine: Book Reviewing and Eighteenth-Century Literary Careers (Stanford
University Press, 1996), 1.
3

Michael Gavin, The Invention of English Criticism: 1650–1760 (Cambridge University Press, 2015), 20.

4

Joan Shelley Rubin, The Making of Middlebrow Culture (University of North Carolina Press, 1992), 17, 19.

5

Janice A. Radway, A Feeling for Books: The Book-of-the-Month Club, Literary Taste, and Middle-Class Desire
(University of North Carolina Press, 1997), 145.
6

Book reviews, of course, continued to evolve after 1900. See Rubin for a description of major 20th-century trends.
For an overview of book reviews in early American periodicals, see Frank Luther Mott, A History of American
Magazines: 1741-1850 (Harvard University Press, 1938), 54-56.
7

Patrick Collier, “What Is Modern Periodical Studies?,” The Journal of Modern Periodical Studies 6.

2 (2016): 92–3, https://doi.org/10.5325/jmodeperistud.6.2.0092.

29

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

8

Andrew Piper, “There Will Be Numbers,” The Journal of Cultural Analytics, May 23, 2016. DOI:
10.22148/16.006.
9

Richard Kluger, qtd. in Rubin, 92.

10

I wish to extend Allison Hegel a note of gratitude, as her work on book review trends on Goodreads has been
crucial to the development of my thinking. I would like to thank Richard Jean So for reading and responding to this
essay in a draft stage. My wife Rebecca Lee also read several versions of this essay and offered numerous
suggestions, for which I am deeply grateful. This work would not have been possible without the cooperation of The
New York Times, and the dedicated staff at the University of Pittsburgh who helped facilitate the collaboration.
Finally, I want to thank Andrew Piper for all his advice and encouragement developing the dataset for this article
and revising it for publication.
11

Ted Underwood, David Bamman, and Sabrina Lee, “The Transformation of Gender in English-Language
Fiction,” The Journal of Cultural Analytics February 13, 2018. DOI: 10.7910/DVN/TEGMGI.
12

Ibid.

13

Here I am invoking Gérard Genette’s idea of a paratext, as well as his distinctions between authorial and
allographic. See Genette, Paratexts: Thresholds of Interpretation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997),
2-12.
14

The engaged and sustained discussion of these subjects in and around periodical studies foregrounds much of my
work on The New York Times Book Review, including Dallas Liddle, “Genre: ‘Distant Reading’ and the Goals of
Periodicals Research.” Victorian Periodicals Review 48.3 (October 2, 2015): 383–402.
https://doi.org/10.1353/vpr.2015.0047; Hannah McGregor, “Remediation as Reading: Digitising The Western Home
Monthly.” Archives and Manuscripts 42.3 (September 2, 2014): 248–57.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01576895.2014.958864; and Jeffrey Drouin, “Close- And Distant-Reading Modernism:
Network Analysis, Text Mining, and Teaching The Little Review.” The Journal of Modern Periodical Studies 5.1
(August 13, 2014): 110–35. I wish to express my thanks to the reviewer who called my attention to several of the
periodicals studies articles cited here and elsewhere in the article.
15

This growing area of overlap also includes (but is not limited to) Katherine Bode, Reading by Numbers:
Recalibrating the Literary Field (Anthem Press, 2014); Katherine Bode, A World of Fiction: Digital Collections and
the Future of Literary History (University of Michigan Press, 2018); Ryan Cordell, “Reprinting, Circulation, and the
Network Author in Antebellum Newspapers,” American Literary History 27.3 (September 1, 2015): 417–45,
https://doi.org/10.1093/alh/ajv028; Andrew Piper and Richard Jean So, “Women Write About Family, Men Write
About War,” The New Republic, April 8, 2016. https://newrepublic.com/article/132531/women-write-family-menwrite-war.
16

I have not positioned my work in relation to computational approaches to book reviews for, as Peter Boot argues,
“Computational linguistic research as a tool for understanding the variety of online book response is still at a very
early stage of development” (34). For an extended literature review of what had been published through 2013, see
Boot, “The Desirability of a Corpus of Online Book Responses.” Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational
Linguistics for Literature. ACL, 2013.
17

Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste, trans. Richard Nice (Routledge, 2013),
223. Pierre Bourdieu, The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature, trans. Randal Johnson (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1993), 30.
18

See, especially, Beth Driscoll, The New Literary Middlebrow: Tastemakers and Reading in the Twenty-First
Century (Springer, 2014), 12-17.
19

Cecilia Konchar Farr and Tom Perrin, “Introduction: Inventing the Middlebrow,” Post45, The Middlebrow: A
Special Cluster. July 2, 2016. http://post45.research.yale.edu/2016/07/introduction-inventing-the-middlebrow/. On
the origins of the terms highbrow and lowbrow and tie to racist discourse, see Lawrence W. Levine,
Highbrow/Lowbrow: The Emergence of Cultural Hierarchy in America. (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1990): 221-222. For additional documentation on the first uses of the term middlebrow, see Driscoll and Radway.
20

Radway, 152.

21

Radway, 144.

30

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

22

Radway, 152.

23

See, especially, Nina Baym, Novels, Readers, and Reviewers: Responses to Fiction in Antebellum America.
(Cornell University Press, 1984).
24

Rubin, xviii.

25

Rubin, 35.

26

Rubin, 37.

27

Jaime Harker, America the Middlebrow: Women’s Novels, Progressivism, and Middlebrow Authorship between
the Wars (University of Massachusetts Press, 2007), 16.
28

Driscoll, 17.

29

Driscoll, 29.

30

Radway, 144.

31

Maria DiCenzo, “Remediating the Past: Doing ‘Periodical Studies’ in the Digital Era.” ESC: English Studies in
Canada 41.1 (September 24, 2015): 19–39. https://doi.org/10.1353/esc.2015.0000.
32

See “Books and Authors,” The New York Times, November 11, 1896, 6.
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1896/11/01/106850832.html; “New Publications,” The New York
Times, May 17, 1896, 27. https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1896/05/17/105750114.html; and
“Bourget’s New Novel Figures in Caillaux Murder Trial,” The New York Times, July 26, 1914, 2.
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1914/07/26/100099730.html
33

Francis E. Brown, The Story of The New York Times Book Review. (The New York Times Company, 1968): 7,
9, 18.
34

See, for example, The New York Times, July 15, 1905, 18.
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1905/07/15/101828118.html?pageNumber=18
35

The New York Times, January 22, 1922.
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1922/01/22/98973696.html
36

The dataset I have assembled divides several of these clusters into individual reviews in order to boost
representation of reviews by perceived-female authors. Code and lemma frequency tables for this article are online
at https://github.com/mjlavin80/nyt-reviews-1905-1925-gender.
37

A work with multiple authors, all perceived to belong to one gender, were categorized as male-labeled-reviews or
female-labeled-reviews respectively.
38

Johanna Drucker, “Why Distant Reading Isn’t,” PMLA 132.3 (May 2017), 631.

39

The New York Times Article Search API includes links to pdf files that can be downloaded. No “recognized text”
is stored within these files, so I worked with staff at The New York Times license OCR data.
40

I used Spacy (Python) for tokenization and lemmatization. See Michal Toman, Roman Tesar, and Karel Jezek,
“Influence of Word Normalization on Text Classification,” Proceedings of InSciT 4 (2006): 354–58.
41

I used PyEnchant to drop all non-dictionary matching terms from the corpus rather than replace them with their
likeliest alternatives.
42

For a description of TF-IDF and its effects, see David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, Michael I. Jordan, “Latent
Dirichlet Allocation” Journal of Machine Learning Research 3 (January 2003): 993-1022.
43

Amanda Golden and Cassandra Laity, “Feminist Modernist Digital Humanities,” Feminist Modernist Studies 1
(September 2, 2018): 205, https://doi.org/10.1080/24692921.2018.1503786.
44

Ibid.

45

Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren Klein, “Introduction,” Data Feminism. Public comment draft (MIT Press, 2018)
n.p. https://bookbook.pubpub.org/pub/dgv16l22.

31

GENDER DYNAMICS AND CRITICAL RECEPTION: A STUDY OF EARLY 20TH-CENTURY BOOK REVIEWS

46

See Matthew L. Jockers and Gabi Kirilloff, “Understanding Gender and Character Agency in the 19th Century
Novel,” The Journal of Cultural Analytics Dec. 1, 2016. DOI: 10.31235/osf.io/sw85m; Eve Kraicer and Andrew
Piper, “Social Characters: The Hierarchy of Gender in Contemporary English-Language Fiction,” Journal of
Cultural Analytics. January 30, 2018. DOI: 10.31235/osf.io/4kwrg; Susan Brown and Laura Mandell, “The Identity
Issue,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. Feb. 13, 2018. DOI: 10.31235/osf.io/9qvby; Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and
Yuancheng Zhu, “Race, Writing, and Computation: Racial Difference and the US Novel, 1880-2000.” The Journal
of Cultural Analytics January 11, 2019. DOI: 10.22148/16.031; and Underwood, Bamman, and Lee.
47

See Brendan O’Connor, David Bamman, and Noah Smith, “Computational Text Analysis for Social Science:
Model Assumptions and Complexity,” Proceedings of the NIPS Workshop on Computational Social Science and the
Wisdom of Crowds, December 1, 2011, http://repository.cmu.edu/lti/212; Dan Jurafsky et. al., “Linguistic Markers
of Status in Food Culture: Bourdieu’s Distinction in a Menu Corpus,” The Journal of Cultural Analytics October 18,
2016. DOI: 10.22148/16.007; and Underwood, Bamman, and Lee, 2018.
48

Female-labeled-reviews were oversampled, in part, to make the machine learning model less vulnerable to
influence by the reviews of any particular year. When constructing my training and test set, I also used random
samples of reviews from 1905 and 1925 to ensure that material from these two years did not overwhelm the
predictive models.
49

For an explanation of F1 scores and why they are a preferred measure, see Kevin P. Murphy, Machine Learning:
A Probabilistic Perspective (MIT Press, 2012).
50

Likewise, because of multicollinearity, we cannot assume a feature with a high coefficient score, if used in
isolation, will have robust predictive power. For more information on complexities of multicollinearity, see Yasin
Asar, “Some New Methods to Solve Multicollinearity in Logistic Regression,” Communications in Statistics Simulation and Computation 46.4 (April 21, 2017): 2576–86, https://doi.org/10.1080/03610918.2015.1053925. See
also David W. Hosmer Jr, Stanley Lemeshow, and Rodney X. Sturdivant, Applied Logistic Regression (John Wiley
& Sons, 2013).
51

Class weighting does not have any effect on how the list of term coefficients is assembled. The most informative
coefficients are trained in a separate phase of the model. See “class weight” at https://scikitlearn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.html
52

Barbara Hochman, Getting at the Author: Reimagining Books and Reading in the Age of American Realism
(University of Massachusetts Press, 2009), 9-10.
53

Simone de Beauvoir, The Second Sex, trans. Constance Borde (Vintage, 2011), 5.

54

Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon, and Anat Rachel Shimoni, “Automatically Categorizing Written Texts by
Author Gender,” Literary and Linguistic Computing 17.4 (November 1, 2002): 401–12,
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/17.4.401.
55

Out of 129 signed reviews of work by women in the inventory I conducted, 97 were written by men and 32 by
women, and those 32 reviews were written by only 22 different female reviewers. This gloss of review authorship is
far from definitive, and reviewer gender may have had a greater effect in different periodicals, or at different times.
More work on the extent of entanglement between the gender signal of a book reviewer and the gender signal of the
reviewed author would be valuable.
56

Randal Johnson, “Editor’s Introduction” to Pierre Bourdieu, The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and
Literature, trans. Randal Johnson (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993), 5.
57

Pierre Bourdieu, The Logic of Practice, trans. Richard Nice (Stanford University Press, 1990), 73.

58

Bourdieu, Logic, 72.

59

Bourdieu, Field, 30. See also Kate Huppatz, Gender Capital at Work: Intersections of Femininity, Masculinity,
Class and Occupation (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012).
60

Relevant schools of thought include lexical field theory, generative grammar, and relational semantics. See Dirk
Geeraerts, Theories of Lexical Semantics (Oxford University Press, 2010), which summarizes many of the
touchstones in these subject areas.

32

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

61

Benjamin M. Schmidt, “Words Alone: Dismantling Topic Models in the Humanities” Journal of Digital
Humanities 2.1 (2012). Accessed March 22, 2018, http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org.
62

Ibid.

63

According to Wordnet’s documentation, “Nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs are grouped into sets of cognitive
synonyms (synsets), each expressing a distinct concept. Synsets are interlinked by means of conceptual-semantic
and lexical relations.” For more information, see “What is Wordnet,” https://wordnet.princeton.edu/
64

The noun childs may look like a tagging error, but it is in fact a proper noun, referring to “a waitress in a Childs
restaurant.” See “America’s Short Story Writers,” The New York Times, February 6, 1921, BR2, BR21.
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1921/02/06/112670148.html?pageNumber=26
65

Descriptive statistics for the top 50 coefficients for male and female labels can be found in the Github repository
for this article, in the folder “tables-and-figures,” in the files called ‘top_50_coef_mf_lemma_word_pos_data.csv’,
‘top_50_coef_mf_doc_count_data.csv’, and ‘senses.md’.
66

“Notable Books in Brief Review,” The New York Times, August 12, 1917, BR2.
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1917/08/12/102359453.html?pageNumber=20
67

“One of America’s Noble Women: Julia Ward Howe's Biography by Her Daughters Reveals Stimulating
Influence of a Fine Personality,” The New York Times, March 19, 1916, 101.
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1916/03/19/99439021.html?pageNumber=38
68

Joseph, O’Connor, “Lord Dufferin’s Career: Sir Alfred Lyall’s Authorized Biography of One of the Most Famous
British Statesmen and Diplomats of Recent Times,” The New York Times, April 1, 1905, BR1, BR2.
https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1905/04/01/101322196.html?pageNumber=21
69

Underwood, Bamman, and Lee point to Nancy Armstrong’s. Desire and Domestic Fiction: A Political History of
the Novel (Oxford University Press, 1990) and Gaye Tuchman and Nina E. Fortin, Edging Women Out: Victorian
Novelists, Publishers and Social Change (Routledge, 2012). See also Monika Maria Elbert, Separate Spheres No
More: Gender Convergence in American Literature, 1830-1930 (University of Alabama Press, 2000); T. Foster,
Transformations of Domesticity in Modern Women’s Writing: Homelessness at Home (Springer, 2002); Kristin J.
Jacobson, Neodomestic American Fiction (Ohio State University Press, 2010); Sally Ledger, The New Woman:
Fiction and Feminism at the Fin de Siècle (Manchester University Press, 1997); and Francesca Sawaya, Modern
Women, Modern Work: Domesticity, Professionalism, and American Writing, 1890-1950 (University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2011).
70

Jockers and Kirilloff, 2016.

71

Underwood, Bamman, and Lee, 2018.

72

Ibid.

73

Piper and So, https://newrepublic.com/article/132531/women-write-family-men-write-war

74

In all three of these figures, an adjustment of +/- 0.05 is applied to counts to make it easier to differentiate male
and female labels.
75

Driscoll, 17.

33

