Oiva, Mila, et al. “Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in
‘Novosti Dnia’ Newsreel Journal (1945-1992).” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 4,
July 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.118495.

ARTICLE

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in
“Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)
Mila Oiva1 , Tillmann Ohm1 , Ksenia Mukhina1 , Mar Canet Solà1 , Maximilian Schich1
1 Tallinn University

Keywords: visual discourse analysis, Soviet history, audiovisual materials, Convolutional Neural Networks, long-term patterns, historical data, ResNet50, visual
culture, propaganda
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.118495

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 4, 2024

Newsreels, short documentary news films, were an influential channel of mass
communication and propaganda in the Soviet Union. They served as an
important means of visualizing the world for audiences in the way the Soviet
authorities wanted it to be depicted. Studies in Soviet visual culture have
recognized both continuities of repeating patterns and changes in the postWorld War II period. This understanding is based primarily on temporally
limited source selections, while a more systematic study of the developments in
Soviet visual culture over a longer period is pending. In this article, we reveal
long-term continuities, subtle changes, and sudden shifts in the official visual
discourse in the Soviet newsreel series ‘Novosti dnia’ (News of the Day) 1945 to
1992. We study visual patterns in approximately 1,700 digitized newsreel issues,
each about ten minutes long, using multidimensional vector embeddings. These
embeddings, produced from the central frames of 205,678 shots, help visually
evaluate the footage and assess visual similarities based on ResNet50 feature
vectors. For this, we use the Collection Space Navigator tool. The article
demonstrates how multidimensional vector embeddings can be used to study
the internal time of the films, and the external time of the years running by.

Introduction
The Soviet leadership took the role of moving images in mass media seriously.
From the inception of the Soviet state, leaders recognized the importance of
cinema in promoting the Soviet cause and propagating desired worldviews,
thereby supervising newsreel production stringently (Heftberger 2; Kowalsky
7; Clarke and Seksenbayeva 265–66). Simultaneously it was important for
them to ensure that the contemporary world was depicted in news media
in ways that supported their policies (McNair 1, 23, 29–30). Newsreels,
the eight to twelve-minute news films shown in cinemas before the main
feature, were produced in the Soviet Union from 1918 until the 1990s,
typically in weekly series. Given that Soviet citizens were among the world’s
top cinema-goers (Roth-Ey 2) the audience for Soviet newsreels effectively
encompassed the majority of the urban population. The production of
Soviet films, news, and newsreels was organized hierarchically, based on
the production location and the size of the audience reached (Roth-Ey;
McNair). Among the various newsreel series released in the Soviet Union,

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

the ‘Novosti Dnia’ (News of the Day) series was the most important. It
was produced at the Central Documentary Film Studios in Moscow from
1944 to 1992. Alongside television news introduced later, the ‘Novosti dnia’
newsreel series is regarded as one of the most central official representations
of the contemporary world in audiovisual format in the post World War II
Soviet Union. Due to its highly curated content and the minimal chance of
accidental on-screen appearances, the series and its changes reflect the official
Soviet worldview.
Earlier research has indicated that Soviet newsreels served inspirational,
pedagogical, and ideological purposes (Kowalsky 8). They portrayed hero
workers in factories and kolkhozes, construction sites, parades, sports,
cultural events, and battles against ‘capitalist imperialism’ abroad (Karavaev
19–28; Clarke and Seksenbayeva 267–69; Veldi et al. 7–8; Kowalsky 8, 10).
The characteristics developed after the October Revolution shaped Soviet
non-fiction film in subsequent years (MacKay et al. 119). Dmitrii Karavaev
has demonstrated how the portrayal of the historical memory of the October
Revolution in Soviet newsreels from 1922 to 1957 evolved over time
(Karavaev 19–28). However, apart from Karavaev's research, few studies have
explored longitudinal characteristics and trends in the Soviet worldview.
Simultaneously, scholarship on broader Soviet culture has identified both
immutable characteristics and subtle changes in the post-World War II era.
Alexei Yurchak describes late Soviet culture, spanning from the mid-1950s
to the mid-1980s, as characterized by constative and performative aspects of
acts and speech. During this period, the form of ideological representations,
evident in posters, monuments, urban visual propaganda, and newsreels,
became immutable, highly standardized, and predictable (Yurchak 14, 22–25,
37, 47, 57–59).
While Yurchak emphasizes the unchanging and ritualized nature of official
late Soviet-era culture, other scholars have observed subtle shifts in Soviet
visual culture, particularly during the late 1950s and early 1960s. Ekaterina
Vikulina notes that Soviet visual culture became increasingly varied in the
late 1950s due to a growing influx of Western popular culture. Concurrently,
staged photography gave way to more spontaneous images, and
photojournalism began to emerge alongside artistic photography (Vikulina
430–32). Visual media also diversified as the number and variety of illustrated
magazines expanded dramatically starting in the mid-1950s, and cinemas
began screening more foreign films from Eastern and Western Europe, the
US, and India (Vikulina 434–35; Roth-Ey 74, 89–91). This diversification
influenced, for example, Soviet feature film, where bodily expressions became
more relaxed, particularly in depictions of young people (Bulgakowa).
Although the emphasis of the earlier studies may vary, they are not necessarily
contradictory. In any culture, it is possible to observe both simultaneous
continuities and changes over time. The studies mentioned above indicate
Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

that the late 1950s were an important period of change, but there is less
knowledge about potential changes in other periods. To better understand
the prevailing characteristics and temporal dynamics of Soviet visual
propaganda, we should shift our focus from analyzing selected short-term
samples to conducting a systematic study over longer time spans.
The aim of this article is to study the long-term developments in the official
Soviet visual representation of the world and its changes by examining groups
of similar images in the ‘Novosti dnia’ newsreel series. Although previous
research has demonstrated both continuities and changes in late Soviet visual
culture, a more systematic long-term analysis is still lacking. To address this
gap, this study investigates the prevailing ways in which the contemporary
world was depicted in the ‘Novosti dnia’ newsreel series, screened from 1945
to 1992, and examines whether and how these depictions changed over
time. Using a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods, including
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) on central frames of each shot, this
research aims to explore, identify and explain temporal patterns.
Earlier research has employed CNNs to search for similar images and identify
specific groups within large historical image collections (Wevers; Lee et al.;
Arnold and Tilton, “Distant Viewing Toolkit for the Analysis of Visual
Culture” 206–207). While most studies examine image collections
comprehensively, there are also instances where vector embeddings have been
used to investigate temporal patterns. For example, Wevers and Smits have
demonstrated that CNNs can facilitate the examination of temporal trends
and historical transitions within image cultures (Wevers and Smits 198–200).
This article builds upon the findings of previous studies and advances the
analysis of temporal patterns identified through multidimensional vector
embeddings, exploring developments both internally within the films and
externally across different years.
While we acknowledge that multimodality is a crucial feature of audiovisual
materials (Oiva et al.), focusing on a single modality also offers its benefits.
By isolating the images from movement, the spoken descriptions in the
voice-over, and the mood-enhancing music, we can concentrate on the visual
characteristics of Soviet culture. The findings of the study reveal both
pronounced continuities and subtle changes in the official Soviet visual
discourse as presented in ‘Novosti dnia’. In the following subsection, we
discuss the methodological approach of this paper in greater detail, and then
proceed to analyze the results.

Methodological Background
The focus of this article is on the visual images of the newsreels, and the
dominant visual discourses that emerge from the data. We define visual
discourses as cultural constructions that aim to shape the social, cultural, and
spatial realities of a specific society or group. Here, intertextuality is crucial

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

because the overarching imagery can only be captured through a group of
images, and the images can only be understood in relation to one another. For
the discourse analysis of images it is essential to examine the kinds of groups
that the images form, the repeating and dominant features they exhibit, and
what is notably absent. In the analysis of visual cultures, journalistic images
such as newsreel frames are particularly interesting because they are often
treated as ‘visual evidence’, even though they are usually carefully selected
representations (Vahtikari et al. 232–34, 246; Rose 186–93, 220–26).
To capture patterns in a large quantity of image data, it is advisable to use
quantitative methods alongside qualitative analysis (Chávez Heras, Cinema
and Machine Vision 5, 11–12). Computational studies of the visual content
of audiovisual data are generally based on either manual or computational
label annotation of pre-set categories or stylistic characteristics such as
objects, individuals, or camera angles. This approach is central to the distant
viewing methodology, developed by Taylor Arnold and Lauren Tilton
(Arnold and Tilton, Distant Viewing 23, 34, 36–37; Arnold and Tilton,
“Distant Viewing Toolkit for the Analysis of Visual Culture” i5). The results
of these annotations typically produce lists of textual keywords (listing objects
visible in the film, film language) or single numerical values such as shot
lengths. Analysis of the film usually involves sorting, clustering, and statistical
analysis of these labels (Carrive et al.; Heftberger 29–38; Burges et al.;
Williams and Bell; Hielscher; Cooper et al.; Bakels et al.; Burghardt et al.;
Arnold and Tilton, “Distant Viewing Toolkit for the Analysis of Visual
Culture”; Masson et al.). The rationale for textual labeling of visual contents
often stems from the necessity to transform images into analysable entities
and to bridge the semantic gap between the images and human
understanding of them (Cooper et al.; Bakels et al.). Additionally, the
widespread use of textual labels in library catalogs and the predominance
of textual analysis in Digital Humanities research may also influence this
practice.

translation loss, partial view, and emphasis on
deduction
Initiating a study by detecting known features using textual labels is
ineffective when the goal is to characterize prevailing visual discourses and
analyze their temporal patterns. For our research question, such an approach
would have three major shortcomings that would significantly reduce its
research potential: it would result in translation loss, would provide only
a partial view of the data, and would place undue emphasis on deduction.
The first issue, translation loss, stems from the challenge of fully describing
an image textually, as interpretations depend on the specific interests of the
human annotator or the training set used for machine annotators. Translating
an image into textual categories often overlooks many image features and
omits subtle nuances and transmissions between different categories (Arnold

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

and Tilton, Distant Viewing 38; Masson et al.). As such, computer-assisted
humanities research has faced criticism for employing overly simplified
keyword sets and distorting human culture into vague categories since the
1960s (Olesen and Kisjes; Da). Instead, we should strive to develop methods
for analyzing cultural materials such as images in ways that capture all
nuances and avoid significant data loss during translation.
The translation loss would lead to the second problem: annotation provides
only a partial view of the data. When annotating images, researchers predefine
what they find interesting and worthy of note in the dataset, often based on
a brief review of the data or knowledge from previous scholarship. At worst,
such an approach would lead researchers to impose pre-set categories on data
without confirming whether these categories truly exist or are predominant.
Additionally, machine learning models, which are most commonly used
to label historical material, are almost exclusively trained on contemporary
datasets so far. As a result, they often fail to recognize historical objects or
individuals that have long been forgotten. While focusing on annotation
allows for targeted examination of specific topics, it does not offer a
comprehensive view of the entire corpus or identify prevailing, yet
unexpected, features.
A partial view on the data would further lead to the third and most
fundamental problem with the annotation approach. It compels scholars to
select at a very early stage of their study what to focus on and what to
annotate, rather than allowing them to first explore what emerges from the
data. As such, the study of topics would be based on prior assumptions, while
inhibiting the exploration needed to uncover previously unidentified patterns
or new categories. Concentrating on fostering a deductive rather than an
inductive approach, in the worst case, researchers may end up studying
what they already know, instead of discovering new ways to perceive and
conceptualize the data.

our approach
To mitigate issues such as translation loss, partial view, and deduction we
employ a combination of quantitative pre-organization and human
interpretation of the data to identify and understand groups of images that
are visually similar (Arnold and Tilton, Distant Viewing 181). Although this
approach still incorporates elements of the previously described problems, it
reduces these issues by delaying categorization until the researcher has had an
opportunity to review the entire dataset.
In our study, we initially processed the data of 1,747 Novosti dnia newsreel
issues spanning the years 1944 to 1992 using an automatic shot detection
algorithm (Castellano) to segment the newsreels into 205,678 footage shots.
This algorithm, which employs a rolling comparison of pixel content in
consecutive frames, identifies new shots when a specified threshold is

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

exceeded. We adjusted the threshold value for some newsreels that had poor
digitization quality and substantial contrast fluctuations. To evaluate the
algorithm’s accuracy, we manually examined a random sample of 58 newsreel
videos, which revealed an average accuracy of 90.5%, with individual video
accuracies ranging from 70% to 98%. By setting a relatively low threshold,
we ensured the detection of most shots while accepting a higher number of
duplicates.
From each detected shot segment, we selected the middle frame to represent
its footage with a single image. Choosing the middle frame helped overcome
some of the inaccuracies in shot boundary detection at the beginning and end
of each segment. We then encoded the frames using a pre-trained ResNet50
model (He et al.), a CNN trained on the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al.), into
2048-dimensional feature vectors. For dimensionality reduction, we employed
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) (McInnes et al.)
to transform these multidimensional image embeddings into 2-dimensional
projections suitable for visual interpretation. There are known issues with
dimensionality reductions (Shinn; Chari and Pachter; Wattenberg et al.),
which only provide a limited view of the complex array of similarities. In the
subsequent analysis of the image contents, we report on the findings derived
from the UMAP projections, which utilized a correlation metric, included
the 15 nearest neighbors, and had a 0.18 minimum distance.
For the analysis of the resulting images, we utilized the Collection Space
Navigator (CSN), a customizable open-source tool that provides an
interactive graphical interface for exploration of visual data in the
multidimensional embedding space (Ohm et al.). The CSN provides
additional features such as metadata filtering, search queries and category
colors to enhance navigating the extensive visual information. Advanced
Dimensionality Reduction algorithms, such as UMAP, are usually nondeterministic, which means that the resulting projections are not “the” but
“a view” of the data. Therefore, the CSN provides different kinds of distant
views of the dataset that help the user analyze the data from a variety of
interpretations.
After the preparatory steps, a team member trained in Soviet cultural history
explored the data using the CSN’s functionality, which allows examination
of different projections. The team member selected the UMAP projection for
closer visual inspection because it was most relevant to the research question
at hand. The CSN provided a simultaneous view of all frames, organized
according to their similarity as determined by the selected projection. From
this overview, the scholar identified clusters of images and conducted a
qualitative analysis using the CSN’s filtering and zooming functionalities.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

implications of our approach
The combination of using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
qualitative approaches facilitated the grouping of frames in a manner that not
only led to new findings but also resonated with the context of Soviet visual
culture. The various projections provided by ResNet50 offered insights into
the different ways the frames were similar to each other. By allowing a human
observer to select the projection for closer analysis and to identify image
clusters based on their knowledge of Soviet cultural history, we ensured that
the final phase of the analysis was grounded in existing scholarly literature.
Consequently, the validity of our final findings is based not solely on
numerical analysis but also on prior studies and understanding of Soviet
visual culture. Our methodological choice to rely on subjective yet informed
human selection and categorization, rather than an algorithmic approach,
stems from the assumption that there is no single correct way to categorize
images; rather, the appropriateness of categorization depends on the chosen
perspective.
Our approach has several important implications for the study. First, it
enables the analysis to begin inductively, and delays human interpretation
until after the images have been categorized based on their visual features.
This strategy not only confirms and delves deeper into visual patterns
identified by earlier scholarship but also uncovers new, previously
unrecognized yet potentially significant visual patterns (Olesen and Kisjes
83–84). Although using multidimensional vector embeddings can be viewed
as another method of categorizing images, and these are influenced by the
underlying training data (Arnold and Tilton, Distant Viewing 182) this
approach of disregarding label predictions initially allows for the grouping of
images based on their technical features, thereby delaying the assignment of
meanings.
Secondly, converting images into vector representations partially addresses the
issues of translation loss and partial view by focusing on sensory features
of images that are incompletely captured by verbal descriptions (Masson
et al.). The digitization of audiovisual material transforms it from physical
film materials to numeric data. While digitization and vector transformations
inevitably involve some data loss, they facilitate a different type of
examination through the ‘estrangement’ of the data (Mittell; Chávez Heras,
“Creanalytics”).
Thirdly, using vector representations shifts the focus to how images are
portrayed and putting what is portrayed to a secondary position. As Eva
Hielscher has noted, the manner in which objects are depicted may be
more significant for meaning making than the frequency of their appearance
(Hielscher). Therefore, it is not only important to identify the objects but
also to examine how they are portrayed. Employing multidimensional
embeddings to approach image objects through visual family resemblance
Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

allows for initial clustering based on the ways objects are depicted, followed
by an exploration of what has been shown repeatedly in a similar manner.
This method can help identify clusters of congruent ways of depicting similar
objects, which are likely considered meaningful by the authors if they appear
frequently (Karjus et al.). If similar objects are depicted in the same way
repeatedly and over a long period, we can assume that there is a meaning
attached to them that the film-makers intended to convey.
Fourthly, the numerical nature of the vector representations enables the
recognition of overlapping and multimodal similarities, as well as subtle
continuities, rather than merely categorizing them into crude baskets of
textual labels. In our research process, we qualitatively identify fuzzy cluster
areas of similar images instead of algorithmically assigning each frame a
specific cluster ID. This approach upholds the notion that similarities are
continuous rather than categorical, and that a frame can simultaneously
belong to several categories. It also acknowledges the possibility of identifying
an infinite number of layers of sub-clusters, but limits the analysis to a level of
abstraction that is appropriate for the research question. Our method aligns
with the insights from earlier studies in cultural data analytics, which have
emphasized the importance of recognizing subtle continuities in cultural data
(Arnold and Tilton, Distant Viewing 44, 181; Manovich 10, 164).
Finally, reproducibility in our study implies that other scholars analyzing the
same material would readily recognize our findings. However, our results
are not exhaustive; other researchers may identify additional clusters, subclusters, and patterns within the data.

Visual Temporal Patterns in Novosti Dnia
Watching numerous issues of the ‘Novosti dnia’ newsreel gives the impression
of sameness, with recurring annual celebrations of the New Year, Women’s
Day, First of May, and October Revolution, alongside representations of
industrial and scientific progress and abundant harvests, consistently
heralding the Soviet country’s march toward a bright future until the
mid-1980s. By stripping the data of sound and movement, and focusing on
the still images of each shot, we are able to highlight significant characteristics
of visual tropes and relate these to the broader visual culture in the Soviet
Union.
An overview of the UMAP projection of the frames reveals distinctive
condensations, peninsulas, and even islands of images that share similar
visual components (for more on interpreting a UMAP projection see Arnold
and Tilton, Distant Viewing 188, 204). The emphasis on visual similarity
focuses on how the objects and the environments are depicted, based on a
variety of dimensions, incorporating a range of dimensions from dark to
light, granular to robust, and various lines or forms. This approach does not
categorize images based on what is depicted, since the same objects can appear

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 1. A UMAP projection of ResNet50 embeddings of all extracted frames per shot reveals seven prominent image
clusters. These clusters are circled in the figure and have been named by the authors as ‘Nature’; ‘Monumental
gatherings’; ‘People in meetings’; ‘Closeups of people’; ‘Industrial production’; ‘Title frames and other texts’; and ‘City
views’.

differently. For example, human figures may be portrayed with close-ups, in
motion, sitting in rows in meeting rooms, or marching in large crowds during
a parade, each resulting in visually distinct frames.
A closer examination of the UMAP projection reveals generic clusters within
the ‘Novosti dnia’ newsreel series that can be categorized as ‘Nature’,
‘Monumental gatherings’, ‘People in meetings’, ‘Closeups of people’,
‘Industrial production’, ‘Title frames and other texts’, and ‘City views’, as we
have also noted elsewhere (Oiva et al.) (Figure 1).
To determine whether the impression of sameness observed when watching
the newsreels persists when focusing solely on the images and incorporating
a quantitative approach, we will first analyze the temporal composition of
the data. Subsequently, we will explore what the internal and external times
of the newsreels reveal about the dynamics. For the remainder of the paper,
we will examine the temporal sequences of specific image groups in the data
more closely.

Temporal Composition of the Data
The temporal composition of the data, also analyzed using the CSN, reveals
variation in the production and preservation of newsreels in the Soviet
Union, along with crucial omissions of data (Figure 2). The initial and final
periods of newsreel production are distinct from the main body of data, each
in its unique way. The number of issues produced annually from 1945 to
1986 generally fluctuated between 52 and 48, roughly corresponding to one
Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 2. Distribution of the 'Novosti dnia’ newsreel series issue numbers from 1945 to 1992. Each frame represents a
single issue number. Notably, the issues from 1965 are absent from the dataset. Additionally, the film material appears
also noticeably darker from mid-1960 to 1976, which could be attributed to the use of different film materials or
digitization methods. Color footage was introduced in mid-1987. The visualization was produced using the Collection
Space Navigator tool.

issue per week, with occasional breaks during holiday seasons. In the early
1950s there was a peak in production, reaching up to 72 issues per year. By
1987 the annual output had halved, and towards the end of the period, the
frequency of double issues increased, further reducing the publication rate of
the newsreels. We will explore the details of the final period later in this article
and now turn to the specifics of the beginning of ‘Novosti dnia’ newsreel
production.
Initially, from 1945 to 1953, the issue numbers of the data suggest that
newsreel production likely reached at least 45 issues per year, although
several issues are missing. This absence is probably due to the confiscation
of materials featuring depictions of Stalin after his death in March 1953.
During the Stalinist era, from the late 1920s until 1953, newsreels frequently
depicted Stalin, including his portraits and slogans praising him (Karavaev
25). Following Stalin’s death, many films were ‘de-Stalinized’ by removing
footage that referenced Stalin, particularly during the 1950s and the 1970s
(Heftberger 275–82; MacKay). The scant number of frames featuring Stalin
in our dataset suggests that the missing footage was likely removed as part of
the de-Stalinization of archives, resulting in gaps in our dataset.
Another peculiarity of the early ‘Novosti dnia’ production is the apparent
peak in newsreel production around 1954. Although it is not possible to
determine the exact number of issues produced from 1945 to 1953 based on
the available data, this peak corresponds with the surge in overall Soviet film
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

production in the mid-1950s. At that time, the Soviet Ministry of Culture
shifted its film production policy from focusing on grand masterpieces to
promoting a greater number and variety of films, which resulted in a
significant increase in feature film productions compared to the drastically
low numbers of the early 1950s (Gilburd, To See Paris and Die 191; RothEy 29). It appears that newsreel production numbers remained stable during
the early 1950s, while feature films experienced production cuts. Although
definitive conclusions cannot be drawn from the available data, it is plausible
that the tightening grip of Stalinism in its final years impacted feature film
production more than newsreel propaganda. In April 1956, the Central
Documentary Film Studios, which produced the ‘Novosti dnia’ newsreel
series, reported to the Soviet Ministry of Culture that the volume of
documentary films and newsreel issues produced in 1955 and the first quarter
of 1956 exceeded the annual plans by 148%. The report highlighted that the
studio produced films reflecting the “historical decisions of the 20th Party
Congress, citizens’ efforts to fulfill the goals of the ongoing 6-year plan, and
the expanding foreign relations of the Soviet Union” (Report 1956).
According to the available dataset, it appears that neither Stalin’s death
nor the subsequent peak in production led to visual differences in newsreel
images. The different projections of the embeddings indicate that the frames
from before and after 1953 are visually similar. However, this broad overview
of the data, might be misleading. It is conceivable that the data removed
contained dissimilar frames, but the remaining dataset was curated to meet
the standards of the post-Stalinist period. Upon closer examination, we
can identify frames that depict the reopening of the country to foreign
relations and the increased production of consumer goods, policies that
were implemented after Stalin’s death (Kozlov 3; Kozlov and Gilburd 27,
32–33, 45; Gilburd, “The Revival of Soviet Internationalism in the Mid
to Late 1950s” 364–68, 376; Crowley and Reid 10; Zakharova 100, 109).
For viewers at the time, the significant reduction of references to Stalin and
the introduction of new themes would have represented a noticeable shift.
Nevertheless, these themes are visually presented in a manner that aligns them
with the extant footage from the Stalinist period.

Changes in the Internal and External Time of the Newsreels
The temporality of a newsreel series can be explored by also focusing on both
the internal and external time of the newsreels (Chávez Heras et al.). The
internal time of the ‘Novosti dnia’ followed a specific logic, similar to that
observed in Bulgarian newsreels, for instance (Pozharliev and Gallo González
99–100). This series maintained a hierarchy of news stories: the opening
stories typically addressed matters of great political importance, the middle
segments covered socially relevant issues such as industrial production and
agriculture, and the series concluded with stories dedicated to culture, sports,

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

and other ‘lighter’ topics. In the external time sequence of a newsreel series,
months and years succeed one another, allowing subtle political and cultural
shifts to become gradually apparent as time progresses.
Visualizing the internal and external temporalities of the newsreels highlights
customary storylines within the internal time, along with their external
continuities and changes. Figure 3 illustrates the internal temporal
distribution of newsreel frames, categorizing them as starting shots (shots
1-29), mid shots (30-60), and the end shots (61-248). Most newsreels lasted
8-10 minutes and contained 90-140 shots. It is rare for a newsreel issue to
contain up to 248 shots. The external timeline is segmented according to
significant periods in Soviet political history: 1945-1954 (late Stalinism and
its immediate aftermath), 1955-1964 (Khrushcev’s rise and reign), 1966-1984
(Brezhnev’s reign and the era of stagnation) and 1985-1992 (the perestroika
period and the dissolution of the Soviet Union). This segmentation results in
an uneven distribution of years, which nonetheless facilitates the exploration
of potential differences between the eras.
Temporal division following the leadership periods makes sense because the
newsreel contents were aligned with the shifting policies. In the Soviet Union,
the acceptability of the contents of newsreels and documentary films was
verified at several stages of production. The authorities not only controlled
what was shown in the newsreels, but also how it was presented. The
directors had to adhere strictly to the instructions coming from above, and
newsreels highlighted and amplified the decisions made by the authorities
(Clarke and Seksenbayeva 269). The Main Editorial Board of the Central
Documentary Film Studios evaluated the most recent newsreel issues and
decided who was responsible for which tasks in the forthcoming weeks in
its weekly meetings. Their criteria for a successful newsreel issue were that
it should be engaging and supportive of the policy goals of the Central
Committee of the Soviet Union. They also focused on the depiction of
cultural events that were otherwise inaccessible to those living outside the
capital, thereby extending their reach. Before production began, the Editorial
Board planned how best to promote the policies of the Communist Party
(Protocols 1955-1957).
Figure 3 illustrates that storylines typically followed a pattern where the
newsreels began with title frames, followed by ‘City views’ indicating the
location of the opening news story, and depictions of ‘People in meetings’.
Temporal differences in the opening shots are evident: starting from the
mid-1950s, there is a clear emphasis on frames depicting (mostly men wearing
black suits in) meetings. Interestingly, during the Khrushchev period, there
appear to be two distinct types of meetings (see A in Fig. 3), with the
upper type displaying leaders in more dynamic compositions. The trope of
‘Dynamic Leaders’ was less emphasized from 1965 to 1984, but the ‘People
in meetings’ cluster extends further to the left and images depicting ‘Meeting

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 3. A UMAP projection of Novosti dnia newsreel series in internal and external temporal sequences, shown
through filtering of the same projection. Starting scenes (scenes 1-29), mid scenes (30-60), and end scenes (61-248) in
vertical axis. The time baskets of 1945-1954, 1955-1964, 1966-1984, and 1985-1992 in horizontal axis. (A) shows the
two types of ‘People in Meetings’ clusters appearing in 1955-1964; (B) indicates the extension of the cluster to cover
images on the ‘Meeting Table’ cluster; (C) shows the ‘Agriculture’ cluster; (D) points out the cluster for leisure time
activities. Year 1965 is missing from the data.

Tables’ begin to appear (see B in Fig. 3). These images are portrayed not only
in the opening but also in the middle of the newsreels. The perestroika period
and the dissolution of the Soviet Union from 1985 to 1992 also start with
title frames, city views, and depictions of people in meetings; however, this
period is marked as a distinctly different era.
The middle segments of the newsreels (shots 30-60) consistently highlighted
‘Industrial Production’ and ‘Nature’ from their inception in 1945 until to
the mid-1980s. Within the ‘Nature’ cluster, depictions of ‘Agriculture’ can
be identified (see C in Fig. 3). The newsreels concluded with depictions of
cultural events such as dance and circus performances, sports events, and
fashion shows. These images frequently featured close-ups of the audience
enjoying the shows and applauding.

The Kremlin
Moving on to a closer analysis of the temporal developments of interesting
clusters emerging from the data, we will first examine one of the most
temporally stable clusters. The Moscow Kremlin, the old fortification located
at the heart of the city and used as the headquarters of the Soviet leadership,
was continuously depicted in the newsreels. Often the first news stories
featured important meetings with domestic organizations or foreign
delegations in Moscow, with the initial shot showcasing the venue of the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 4. The Moscow Kremlin related ‘peninsulas’: a Kremlin tower and the Grand Kremlin Palace seen from a bridge
crossing the Moskva river, meetings at the Great Kremlin Palace, and at the State Kremlin Palace, repeating from the
1950s until the mid-1980s, and in the case of the outdoors Kremlin views and meetings in the State Kremlin Palace
until the 1990s.

meeting, the Kremlin. As Figure 4 illustrates, shots depicting the Kremlin
from outside, and gatherings inside the grandiose meeting halls of the Grand
Kremlin Palace and the State Kremlin Palace, create distinctive ‘peninsulas’
in the UMAP projection. These ‘peninsulas’, identified qualitatively as
distinctive elements on the edges of the ‘mainland’ of the UMAP projection,
belong to the larger clusters of ‘City views’ and ‘Monumental gatherings’
shown in Figure 1. The positioning of the ‘peninsulas’ on the edges of
the ‘mainland’ indicates that the projection recognizes them as distinct,
yet partially connected entities. Our qualitative observations also confirm
that these image sets were recognizable to human observers as signifying
images. These frames represent a particularly stable continuity from the early
1950s—or the early 1960s in the case of the State Kremlin Palace, which
opened in 1961—through the 1990s. We will discuss the changes observed in
the late 1980s later in the article.
Shooting the footage from the same location—either from a bridge crossing
the Moskva River, or a particularly advantageous spot in the meeting
hall—results in frames that are very similar to each other, and tend to
repeat year after year across several decades. The combination of the frequent
hosting of important events at these venues and a convenient filming location
began to establish a kind of iconicity around the images. When hearing about
a meeting held in the Kremlin, the newsreel audiences could easily visualize

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 5. Soviet leaders receiving a parade on the Lenin Mausoleum from 1953 until 1987.

these images in their minds. Simultaneously, the frequently recurring,
recognizable locations of power reinforced the viewers’ perception of the
stability of the Soviet power.

The Mausoleum
Another ‘peninsula’ of frames recurring over a long temporal stretch features
depictions of the Soviet leadership standing on the Lenin Mausoleum in Red
Square (Fig 5). These images capture the leadership reviewing a parade, often
during the October Revolution or the May Day celebrations. They also form
part of the gallery of Soviet iconography that was publicly displayed to Soviet
citizens and distributed in the foreign press. In his study on the depictions
of the October Revolution in Soviet newsreels from 1922 to 1957, Dmitry
Karavaev demonstrates that showcasing these festivities in newsreels served
as a reminder to audiences of the revolution’s ideals and conveyed that the
leadership staunchly supported these ideals (Karavaev 19).
It presents an interesting contrast that the form of these images—men
standing in line on top of a former leader’s tomb—remains unchanged for
decades, while the individuals and styles of hats vary. This juxtaposition
creates a strong symbolic sense of continuity and masks the reality of
changing leaders, or even the power struggles behind the scenes, which
sometimes lead to individuals being erased from historical records (Karavaev
28). This phenomenon aligns with observations made by Yurchak, who
notes that Soviet ideology was often represented through ritualized practices
(Yurchak 14). Similarly, Knut Hickethier identified standardized forms of
images reoccurring in the West German newsreels in the post World War II
Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

period. He argues that the use of standardized imagery helped the audiences
immediately recognize the content’s context. Additionally, situations were
often depicted in a regimented manner: political greeting rituals, contract
signings, meetings, and event openings were frequently portrayed in a similar
fashion (Hickethier 49). All this contributed to the repetitiveness of the visual
appearance, echoing the ‘pathos formulas’, coined by Aby Warburg, which
refer to a sequence of similar visual configurations passed down through
history (Hickethier 50; Impett and Moretti 1, 5; Warburg). In the case of
newsreels, as Hickethier points out, footage was usually not chosen by paying
explicit attention to ‘pathos formulas’, but rather because they were selected
from the studios’ footage libraries with little reflection, and following the
editors’ embedded pictorial knowledge. Therefore, it can be claimed that the
repeating images reflected the cultural consensus of the time (Hickethier 50).
In the case of Soviet leaders, however, using old footage of leaders became
problematic when they became politically controversial and could no longer
be depicted on the podium (Karavaev 28).
Due to the absence of data from the late 1940s and the 1950s (Figure 2),
it is impossible to verify how consistent the depictions of the leadership
were before the mid-1950s. However, this type of frame became particularly
prevalent during the height of the era of stagnation from the mid-1960s to
the 1980s, and continued into the period of perestroika in the late 1980s. In
contrast, right after Stalin’s death and during the turbulent leadership period
of the mid-1950s, we could identify only two frames of this kind (1953/59 in
Fig. 5, and one from 1958).

Dynamic Leaders
In the opening shots from 1955 to 1964 there is a distinct cluster that later
disappears, referred to as ‘Dynamic Leaders’ (see A in Fig. 3). As Figure 6
illustrates, this cluster predominantly features official delegations outdoors
and was particularly prominent during the Khrushchev period. The common
characteristics of these images include political leaders in dynamic positions,
either walking or greeting each other, and soldiers standing in a row, creating
a strong diagonal line.
It is noteworthy that the emphasis of this cluster is on the late 1950s
and the early 1960s. Generally, the so-called Thaw period following Stalin’s
death has been considered a major turning point in Soviet history, both
politically and culturally. Although many cultural changes began gradually
earlier, the relaxation of political control—from mass terror to ‘selective
suppression’—and openness to cultural influences from abroad led to shifting
ideas, artistic practices, and everyday material culture with a lasting impact
on Soviet society (Kozlov 3; Kozlov and Gilburd 27, 32–33, 45; Gilburd,
“The Revival of Soviet Internationalism in the Mid to Late 1950s” 364–68,
376). Denis Kozlov has noted that starting from the Thaw, Soviet cultural
processes began to align with those in Western Europe (Kozlov 3). Similarly,
Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 6. The ‘Dynamic Leaders’ cluster. The upper row shows that the cluster was prominent in the 1955-1964
starting scenes. The lower row depicts a series of political leaders outdoors meeting each other. The strong diagonal of
soldiers standing on a row together with the moving postures of the leaders are common features to this cluster.

Eleonory Gilburd suggests that the Thaw period marked a democratization of
previously privileged information about foreign cultures and provided access
to more diverse information for a larger audience (Gilburd, “The Revival
of Soviet Internationalism in the Mid to Late 1950s” 363). During this
period, an increasing number of foreign films, especially from France and
Italy, were screened in cinemas, bringing foreign cultures within reach of
a vast majority of Soviet citizens, even those outside major cities. Postcards
depicting foreign cinema stars could be purchased for a few kopecks at
metro station kiosks, further democratizing access to foreign visual culture
(Gilburd, To See Paris and Die 167, 179–80, 204; Oiva, Salmi, et al. 86–88).
Documentaries, such as the film about French singer and film star Yves
Montand’s tour in the Soviet Union, were also utilized to extend foreign
cultural access to broader segments of the population (Oiva, Salmi, et al.). In
1956, the Central Documentary Film Studios reported to the Soviet Ministry
of Culture that the country’s opening to foreign influences was evident in
its expanding coverage on visiting delegations to and from the Soviet Union,
the exchange of newsreel footage with foreign studios had increased, and a
growing number of Soviet cinematographers were visiting foreign countries
(Report 1956).
In her study on the depictions of the Soviet political leadership in the late
1950s and the early 1960s, Ekaterina Vikulina has demonstrated that the
expansion of foreign influences and the political transition from Stalinism
to the more relaxed Khrushchev period were reflected in more dynamic
portrayals of leaders and the expression of emotions in print media (Vikulina
429–65). The static nature of Stalin’s images symbolized the calmness and
certitude of the leader, whereas during the Khrushchev period, leaders began
to be depicted in motion: discussing issues, on the street, in a car, and
expressing emotions, such as smiling (Vikulina 450–51).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 7. The ‘Meeting Table’ cluster. 1956/20: Soviet-French negotiations; 1962/47: Meeting of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union; 1968/26: Visit of the President of Chad; 1978/12: Soviet-Morocco negotiations;
1985/13: Meeting of the Soviet leaders and the delegation of the Socialist International.

Our findings, based on a quantitative approach, confirm Vikulina's
qualitative observations. Simultaneously, our data reveals that although the
‘Dynamic Leaders’ cluster did not disappear in later years, its significance
clearly diminished during the Brezhnev era, which is widely regarded as
a period of stagnation. It is also noteworthy that the political changes
beginning in the mid-1980s were not depicted using images from this cluster.

The Meeting Table
One of the densest frame clusters, evident from at least the mid-1950s
onwards, depicts—mostly men in black suits—sitting around a long table
with papers scattered around (Figure 7). The ‘Meeting Table’ cluster includes
footage of meetings with foreign delegations, the highest political bodies of
the Soviet Union, or labor unions. This type of depiction underscores the act
of negotiation—whether in the international arena or within society—where
participants appear more equally represented than in podium-style meetings
where speakers address an audience (see the meeting depictions in the
‘Kremlin’ clusters, Fig. 4). An equal meeting of representatives from different
countries projects an image of the Soviet Union as an active participant
in the international arena (Fig. 7, frames 1956/20, 1968/26, and 1978/12),
emphasizing the message of Soviet goodwill in contrast to the ‘colonizing
imperialist countries.’ Such ‘democratic’ images were also displayed in relation
to domestic Communist Party or labor union meetings, when the objective
was to convey that the entire country was united in achieving the goals set by
the Communist Party (see, for example, 1962/47).
Due to the scarcity of data from the late 1940s and the early 1950s we cannot
determine whether these types of frames were also shown earlier or if this
was a new phenomenon. The Soviet Union’s opening to the international
Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

arena began in the mid-1950s (Kozlov 3; Kozlov and Gilburd 27, 32–33,
45; Gilburd, “The Revival of Soviet Internationalism in the Mid to Late
1950s” 364–68, 376), and it is likely that after Stalin’s death, the emphasis
in publicity shifted from dictating to negotiating with society. Additionally,
in the late 1920s, the authorities prohibited newsreel studios from showing
footage of “sensitive discussions and meetings” (Clarke and Seksenbayeva
267). It is therefore plausible that during the Stalinist era, newsreel studios
did not independently include material on political meetings in their reels.
The existing ‘Meeting Table’ cluster frames from 1945-1953, for example,
depict people drinking tea, studying, or playing pool (see for example 1956/
33), which represent socially different activities compared to negotiation.
During this period, the new way of showing ‘more democratic’ meetings is
evident not only at the beginning of the newsreels, which showcase more
important gatherings, but also in the middle of the sections, where domestic
gatherings of various organizations are shown. Traditionally, the period from
the mid-1960s to the mid-1980s, during which the cluster was prevalent
(see B in Fig. 3), has been characterized as the era of ‘stagnation’. It is
well-known that the newsreels employed metaphorical images to represent
seemingly concrete current events while simultaneously alluding to broader
unifying symbols. These visual metaphors had a community-forming and
culture-creating effect because they drew upon imagery that forms part of
the foundational components of a cultural group or nation (Hickethier 51).
The focus on images that suggest a more democratic approach to governance
opens new avenues for interpreting this period. It raises the question of
whether the ‘Meeting Table’ cluster was a method of narrating a story of
‘societal agreement’ or visualizing other more abstract themes and intended
meanings.
It is noteworthy that these types of frames were often repeated, and
continued for decades once they began. Unlike the ‘Kremlin’ frame clusters,
the ‘Meeting Table’ cluster frames were shot in various locations. Despite
the locational variety, the repeating visual features of a table—often a long
one creating a strong perspective angle—around which people sat with their
papers, have been captured by the embedding. Producing footage of a
meeting indicates that the leaders considered public information about these
meetings important. Allowing newsreel crews to shoot footage at a meeting
was a deliberate choice by the leadership, while the repeating camera angle is
likely due to practical reasons. Depicting people sitting around a long table
from one end is the simplest way to capture all participants. Simultaneously,
these repeating images formed a visual gallery depicting how Soviet foreign
policy and societal functions were perceived by cinema-going audiences.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Closeups of People
Alongside the topics depicting the leadership in various ways, another
recurring cluster is the ‘Closeups of people’ (see Fig. 1). It is one of the
widest and densest UMAP clusters. It is interesting to note that the collective
ideology was portrayed through a massive amount of closeups of individuals.
They were used to illustrate the work done in factories, construction sites,
and kolkhozes, as well as schools, and kindergartens (Fig. 8), but also to bring
the news topics closer to the audiences so that they could relate to them.
Based on the qualitative analysis of Estonian newsreels from 1951, Martti
Veldi et al. emphasize that during the high Stalinist period, newsreels depicted
working-class heroes, such as milkmaids, drivers, and mechanics, to instill
pride in the ordinary citizens about their country (Veldi et al. 8).
The decades from the 1950s to the 1970s were the golden ages of movie going
in the Soviet Union, in the Soviet Union, after which attendance stared to
decrease. As TV access reached saturation in the USSR during the 1970s,
the box-office figures declined drastically. People began watching movies on
TV instead (Roth-Ey 121). The emergence of television had a significant
impact on newsreel production and content globally (Fielding 992–94), and
it appears that in the Soviet Union, newsreel producers also had to consider
this new rival in audiovisual news production to a certain extent.
In the late 1950s, Soviet newsreels were criticized for being monotonous, and
in 1959 the All-Union meeting of film directors and writers in Moscow urged
directors to also include ‘little people’, such as hairdressers and newspaper
sellers, in their newsreels to make the content more vivid. This approach
was not new, as conveying Soviet propaganda by depicting heroic ordinary
workers had been common since the 1930s (Fitzpatrick 73–74; MacKay
382). In Kazakhstan, the initiative was discussed in detail in film studios,
art councils and the department of cinematography within the ministry
responsible for culture, but the new directives were interpreted conservatively,
and little changed in the newsreel content (Clarke and Seksenbayeva 271).
Similarly, the need to renew newsreels in the late 1950s emerged in West
Germany, where the advent of television news, advances in recording
techniques, and a new generation of editors catalyzed the modernization of
newsreels. Editors began to interview “people like you and me” on the streets
and in supermarkets (Schwarz 76).
While discussions on new initiatives do not always lead to tangible results,
adopting a semi-distant view of the ‘Closeups of People’ cluster suggests
that in the case of ‘Novosti dnia’, the discussions may have influenced the
inclusion of closeup shots in newsreels. Analyzing how the cluster evolved in
three-year segments, we observe that closeups of individuals began to form a
distinct cluster in the mid-1950s. This trend intensified starting in 1959 and
continued until the mid-1980s (Fig. 9).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 8. Frames from the ‘Closeups of people’ cluster, with frames of sub-clusters of ‘Headwear’, ‘Helmets’ and
‘Drivers’.

Taking a closer look at the images reveals that, unlike the clusters depicting
the ‘Monumental Gatherings’ and ‘People in Meetings’ (Fig. 1), this category
includes a wider range of ‘ordinary people’ represented, encompassing
women, children, and elderly people depicted in various circumstances (Fig.
8). Clearly, their ‘ordinariness’ was selective, as they portrayed the hardworking and progressive-minded, idealized version of an ordinary (mostly
Soviet) citizen. This depiction excluded individuals who appeared deprived,
poor, or disabled. It seems that this was a deliberate strategy until the
mid-1980s, as archival documentation from Kazakhstan indicates that

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 9. The ‘Closeups of people’ cluster in three-year chunks (apart from 1945-1952, were we have less data) shows
that the cluster started to emerge in the latter half of the 1950s, and became emphasized starting from 1959. It started
to fade at the end of the 1980s and beginning of the 1990s, where we have again less data. Year 1965 is missing.

newsreel cinematographers consciously avoided displaying any controversial
elements in the footage, such as individuals with worn-out clothes or
dilapidated farmyards (Clarke and Seksenbayeva 269).
When depicting people abroad, the footage often showed individuals
suffering from capitalist imperialism, such as African Americans in the US
(see 1961/07 in Fig. 8), or victims of the Vietnam War. It is noteworthy
that all depictions of people, including those in the ‘Closeups of people’,
‘Monumental Gatherings’, and ‘People in Meetings’, feature individuals from
the European side of the Soviet Union, Central Asia, Siberia, and the
Caucasus, thereby emphasizing the multi-ethnicity of the Soviet Union.
Closeups that appear to show non-Soviet, such as people of African descent,
are also included. However, analyzing the representation percentages of
different age groups, perceived genders, and expressed ethnicities in the
official Soviet portrayal of the world would require the use of image detection
and identification algorithms, and is beyond the scope of this article.
It is possible to identify smaller sub-clusters within the larger cluster of
‘Closeups of people’, such as ‘Headwear’, ‘Helmets’, and ‘Drivers’. These
sub-clusters interestingly showcase some archetypical professional groups:
miners and construction workers in their helmets, female factory and kolkhoz
workers in scarves, policemen and military personnel in their hats, and male
political leaders in their city hats. The large number of individuals in helmets
and workers’ caps was distinctive to the depiction of the world in the state
socialist countries. Uta Schwarz has observed that West German newsreels
did not portray male workers or employees, whereas East German newsreels

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

frequently did. In East Germany, showcasing the workers served to promote
the working class as the central political class of socialist society. In contrast,
in West Germany, amid ongoing conflicts between the government, employers
and unions, the government’s newsreel depicted industrial productivity by
featuring economic leaders, ministers, and directors (Schwarz 75).
The sub-clusters identifiable with the help of the UMAP projection offer
a fascinating insight into Soviet symbolic culture through headwear. For
example, women wearing hats during the warm season are almost completely
absent, even in the 1950s. They either wore scarves or no headwear at all.
In contrast, at the other end of the Soviet media spectrum, catalogs of
the latest outfits published by the fashion houses depicted women wearing
hats (Modeli sezona, vesna-leto 1956). This discrepancy suggests that women
wearing hats might have appeared too ‘bourgeois’ to be shown in ‘Novosti
dnia’, revealing that the depiction of people and the world in this series was
more ideologically driven than other Soviet media products.
Exploration of the ‘Closeups of people’ cluster demonstrates that distant
viewing of the newsreel frames with the UMAP projection not only reveals
the size of the clusters in the collection but also helps to understand their
centrality. Additionally, the density of a cluster in the projection indicates
how similar the images are perceived by the UMAP. For a cultural historian,
this provides an initial step in contextualizing groups of visually similar
images within the collection, which can then be enriched through
contextualization based on existing literature and other sources. This
approach guides the researcher’s attention to notice details or patterns that
might not have been observed otherwise, such as headwear, if the research
process had begun with pre-existing knowledge rather than observation of the
data. As new questions arise, this lays the groundwork for further analysis
involving the detection, identification, and annotation of specific features
revealed through distant viewing.

Agriculture
Yet another constant theme in the ‘Novosti dnia’ newsreel series is agricultural
production. This theme is evident both through qualitative observations
and in the textual descriptions of the newsreel contents analyzed earlier
(Oiva et al.). Agricultural production had an important propaganda value
to the leadership. Collective farms were repeatedly depicted reaching their
targets early or producing more food than planned (Clarke and Seksenbayeva
268–69).
Unlike the earlier discussed clusters, agricultural production does not form a
clearly distinguishable ‘island’ or ‘peninsula’ in the UMAP projection but is
scattered among the depictions of ‘Nature’ (Fig. 1). This is understandable,
because although a human viewer of the newsreels associates the smiling
people picking up fruits or cotton, caring for animals, and combine harvesters

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

working on vast fields with the overarching theme of agricultural production,
this is not the case for image embeddings. The visual appearance of a basket
of round apples and a chain of tractors on a field are visually too different to
be clustered together. Additionally, these images share visual features, such as
a distinctive horizon and elements of nature, with images depicting themes
other than agricultural production.
As Figure 10 illustrates, it is nonetheless easy to identify decades of
continuous patterns of sub-clusters of agricultural production, such as
combine harvesters working in fields. A plentiful harvest, securing the wellbeing of the citizens, and human mastery over nature through technology
are central themes in the ‘Novosti dnia’ repertoire, transcending all policy
changes until the mid-1980s. In the 1980s, depictions of agricultural
production continued, but without the iconic images of combine harvesters.
Frames identified by UMAP as similar to those of the combine harvesters
were used to depict ecological problems alongside agriculture (1988/01,
1988/21, 1989/10, 1989/22, and 1991/21 in Figure 10).
Exploring depictions of agricultural production reveals that a news story
theme (‘agriculture’) does not necessarily correspond to a single visual cluster
(‘combine harvesters’), but instead may be associated with multiple visual
clusters. Simultaneously, it is possible that the visual tropes, identifiable by
a human viewer through the combination of visual features and recognition
of specific objects in the images, are intermingled in the UMAP projection
with similar images that represent other themes. Examining the temporal
development of a sub-cluster of images recognized by UMAP as similar can
illustrate how certain visual patterns begin to diminish (‘combine harvesters’)
and are replaced by others that depict different subjects (‘ecological problems
and agriculture’).

The Perestroika Problem
We will now return back to the particularities of the dataset’s final period,
which have been noted on various occasions of this article. As stated earlier,
the annual number of newsreel issues halved in 1987 (Fig. 2); the opening,
middle, and closing shots from 1985 to 1992 all include a new distinctive
cluster absent in all other periods (Fig. 3); there are fewer closeups in this
period compared to earlier ones (Fig. 8); and images depicting ecological
issues merge into the ‘Agriculture’ cluster (Fig. 10). Indeed, there was
something specific about this time, and it is clearly visible in the data.
These changes are clearly linked to the policies of glasnost’ (‘openness’ in
English) and perestroika (‘reconstructing’) introduced by Soviet leader
Mikhail Gorbachev in 1985. This shift led to increasing openness in media
coverage, introducing previously unexplored news topics, such as economic
problems, blank spots of history, catastrophes, strikes, ethnic unrest, and
crime in the press (McNair 44–59). In countries where newsreel production

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 10. The ‘Combine Harvesters’ cluster The depictions of combine harvesters working on the field are located in
the larger group of images depicting nature and outdoors with a distinctive horizon. However, it is easy to identify
several combine harvester depictions within this group, shot from the 1950s to the mid-1980s. In the late 1980s the
iconic images of combine harvesters disappear, and the images in the cluster begin to depict in addition to field work
also ecological problems in cotton production (1988/01), water pollution (1988/21), the problems of the Aral Sea
(1989/10), and forestry (1991/21).

had not been state subsidized, it had ceased by the late 1960s due to the rise
of more popular television (Chambers et al. 6; Fielding 992–94); however, in
the Soviet Union, production continued with state support. Ironically, the
increased openness in mass media eventually led to the gradual decline of
newsreels, likely due to reduced state funding and growing competition from
other media forms.
On top of the specificities of this period listed earlier in this article, the
UMAP projection of frames reveals a distinctive ‘Perestroika’ cluster
emerging between 1985 and 1992 (Fig. 11). Interestingly, it is not visually
obvious to a human viewer what new element in the images causes the
UMAP to separate the ‘Perestroika’ cluster images from others. During this
period, there were also images similar to those of earlier years; for example,
the clusters of ‘Nature’, ‘Monumental Gatherings’, and ‘Title frames and
Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

other texts’ persisted, while ‘People in meetings’ disappeared completely. The
persistence of several clusters suggests that introduction of color film was not
the distinguishing feature recognized by UMAP. It is possible that the images
contain a technical feature, such as a watermark added later, which is difficult
for a human to recognize and unrelated to the actual visual contents, but
which causes UMAP to categorize these images as similar.
A closeup of the ‘Perestroika’ cluster (Fig. 12) shows that it contains a
similar variety of images, ranging from closeups and large crowds of people
to depictions of individuals at work, in meetings, or on the street. The
frames seem to follow a color scheme, but it is not consistent. Another
possible hypothesis is that the common feature of these images is that the
people are not posing for the camera, and quite often the camera angle
is not from below but either direct or slightly from above. Additionally,
the postures of some individuals appear tired, with slightly bent backs.
Testing this hypothesis is beyond the scope of this article, as it requires
an examination of postures and camera angles to delve deeper. Therefore,
determining whether the ‘Perestroika’ cluster is due to the changed political
atmosphere, a result of shifts in filmmaking practices, evolving relationships
between cinematographers and the subjects, a changing philosophy of what
and how newsreels should depict, or something entirely different, remains to
be explored later.
Alongside the ‘Perestroika’ cluster, there are also distinctive peninsulas
elsewhere (Fig. 11). For example, the depictions from the State Kremlin
Palace, discussed in the ‘Kremlin’ sub-section of this article (Fig. 4),
continued in the late 1980s, albeit in a slightly modified manner. Figure 13
illustrates that ‘Monumental gatherings’ at the State Kremlin Palace persisted
in the late 1980s, but their nature changed. Footage was consistently shot
at meetings held in the palace, but the positioning of the frames in the
UMAP projection shifted. The State Kremlin Palace hosted the 19th Party
Conference in July 1988 and sessions of the newly-elected Congress of
People’s Deputies and Supreme Soviet in 1989, which discussed the country’s
reforms. These meetings were the focal point of news reporting both in
newsreels and on television (McNair 62). It is possible that the changing
atmosphere of these meetings was captured by the UMAP projection as well,
although the exact reasons for the shifting position of the frames are not
entirely clear. One differentiating feature is color, but this alone does not
explain the variation, as the UMAP projection shows color images mixed with
gray-scale images. For instance, 1978/41 and 1981/16 are located in close
proximity to the frames from the perestroika period, although they are in
grayscale. Meanwhile, no color frames from the perestroika period are found
in the peninsula of the older frames.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 11. UMAP of frames from 1985-1992. (1) large crowds in meetings in the State Kremlin Palace; (2) a ‘peninsula’ of people giving speeches on a podium; (3) the ‘Perestroika’ cluster with a
variety of images; (4) title frames and other texts; (5) nature sceneries with a distinctive horizon.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 12. Closeup of UMAP projection of the “Perestroika” cluster 1988-1992.

One explanation for the different peninsulas representing frames from various
years could be that, at least from a human viewer’s perspective, the audience
in the perestroika period is depicted in a more dynamic way: they are shown
in poses that suggest movement or free interaction among themselves. In
contrast, the most dynamic frames from the pre-perestroika period depict
the audience standing and clapping their hands, thus collectively reacting to
what was said on the podium, but not interacting with each other. One
outlier frame (1981/16) portrays the audience in slightly more dynamic
poses, although they are still clapping their hands, thus supporting the
hypothesis that the basis for the different groupings of frames lies in the
poses of the people depicted. However, a second outlier (1978/41) displays
the audience and the speaker in motionless poses, which undermines the
likelihood of this hypothesis. In this paper, we are unable to provide a
definitive answer to the question of what underlies these differences, and
further exploration of the pose hypothesis should be pursued in a separate
study.

Conclusions
Did the depiction of the world in the Novosti dnia change over time,
or did it remain the same? The answer to this question depends on the
level of detail applied in interpreting what constitutes repetition and how
we contextualize the images. As we have shown above, there were notable
visual continuities, but also new visual clusters emerging, fading away, and
new themes integrating into existing clusters. However, considering that
the surrounding visual environment in the Soviet Union underwent radical
changes from 1945 to 1992—introducing television and video, and the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Figure 13. Meetings in the State Kremlin Palace. The UMAP projection of the central frames (A) divide the frames
depicting the meetings into two distinctive ‘peninsulas’ that come from the pre-perestroika (B) and perestroika (C)
periods. Two frames (1981/16 and 1978/41) are located close to the frames from the perestroika period, although they
were screened in the earlier period.

increasing diversification of visual culture—the stability of the 'Novosti dnia’
is remarkable. For the audiences, often young people who came to watch
their favorite domestic comedies or Indian melodramas (Roth-Ey 72, 82, 86,
89–91), the contrast with the newsreels shown before the main feature grew
over the years. Decade after decade, it served as the backbone of the official
Soviet viewpoint, faithfully repeating Soviet symbols, while the rest of the
world moved forward.
Similar to Wevers and Smits (Wevers and Smits 205), our findings
demonstrate that image similarity does not necessarily imply conceptual
similarity. Visual similarity (for example, depictions of a field with a horizon),
what is being depicted (combine harvesters), the relationship of the image
to a news story topic (agriculture), and the intended meaning of the image
(plentiful harvest or polluted water), represent different visual and conceptual
layers of images. Our analysis has focused on the visual similarity layer, and
we argue that identifying continuous visual patterns, especially in the highly
curated material such as the ‘Novosti dnia’, is a fruitful way to capture
fundamental trends and changes in visual culture.
While we have briefly discussed the relationships between visual similarities,
news story topics, and intended meanings, there remains much to explore
in this area. The image clusters examined in this article have generally been
easy to associate with specific news story themes. For example, although the
agricultural theme is distributed across several visual sub-clusters, it can still
be readily identified through the presence of certain visually recognizable
Journal of Cultural Analytics

29

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

objects (tractors, domesticated animals, fruits, cotton, wheat, fields).
Additionally, it is worthwhile to explore how more abstract themes are
visualized and to identify the temporal patterns they follow. One example
of a news topic not addressed here, despite its central role in Soviet selfunderstanding, is industrial production and technological progress. These are
questions that merit future study.
Submitted: July 18, 2024 EDT, Accepted: May 21, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

30

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

works cited
Arnold, Taylor, et al. “Introduction: Special Issue on AudioVisual Data in DH.” Digital
Humanities Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 1, 2021. ProQuest, http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/15/1/
000541/000541.html.
Arnold, Taylor, and Lauren Tilton. Distant Viewing: Computational Exploration of Digital Images.
The MIT Press, 2023, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/14046.001.0001.
---. “Distant Viewing Toolkit for the Analysis of Visual Culture.” GitHub, Distant Viewing Lab,
2017, https://github.com/distant-viewing/dvt.
Bakels, Jan-Hendrik, et al. “Matching Computational Analysis and Human Experience:
Performative Arts and the Digital Humanities.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 014, no. 4,
Dec. 2020.
Bulgakowa, Oksana. The Factory of Gestures. Body Language in Film. PPMedia & Stanford
Humanities Lab, 2008.
Burges, Joel, et al. “Audiovisualities out of Annotation: Three Case Studies in Teaching Digital
Annotation with Mediate.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 015, no. 1, Mar. 2021.
Burghardt, Manuel, et al. “Film and Video Analysis in the Digital Humanities – An
Interdisciplinary Dialog.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 014, no. 4, Dec. 2020.
Carrive, Jean, et al. “Transdisciplinary Analysis of a Corpus of French Newsreels: The ANTRACT
Project.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 1, 2021, http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/
vol/15/1/000523/000523.html.
Castellano, Brandon. Breakthrough/PySceneDetect. 2014. GitHub, https://github.com/
Breakthrough/PySceneDetect.
Chambers, Ciara, et al. Researching Newsreels: Local, National and Transnational Case Studies.
Palgrave Macmillan, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91920-1.
Chari, Tara, and Lior Pachter. “The Specious Art of Single-Cell Genomics.” PLOS Computational
Biology, vol. 19, no. 8, Aug. 2023, p. e1011288. PLoS Journals, https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1011288.
Chávez Heras, Daniel. Cinema and Machine Vision: Artificial Intelligence, Aesthetics and
Spectatorship. Edinburgh University Press, 2024, https://doi.org/10.1515/9781399514736.
---. “Creanalytics: Automating the Supercut as a Form of Critical Technical Practice.” Convergence,
June 2023, p. 13548565231174592. SAGE Journals, https://doi.org/10.1177/
13548565231174592.
Chávez Heras, Daniel, et al. Between History and Poetics: Identifying Temporal Dynamics in Large
Audiovisual Collections. 2023.
Clarke, John, and Gulzira Seksenbayeva. “Visualizing History: The ‘Soviet Kazakhstan’ Newsreel
Series.” Historical Journal of Film, Radio & Television, vol. 38, no. 2, June 2018, pp. 263–73,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01439685.2017.1300406.
Cooper, Allison, et al. “Exploring Film Language with a Digital Analysis Tool: The Case of
Kinolab.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 1, Mar. 2021.
Crowley, David, and Susan E. Reid, editors. Pleasures in Socialism: Leisure and Luxury in the
Eastern Bloc. Northwestern University Press, 2010, https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv43vtgm.
Da, Nan Z. “The Computational Case against Computational Literary Studies.” Critical Inquiry,
vol. 45, no. 3, Mar. 2019, pp. 601–39. journals.uchicago.edu (Atypon), https://doi.org/10.1086/
702594.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

31

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Deng, Jia, et al. “ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database.” 2009 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, IEEE Xplore, 2009, pp. 248–55, https://doi.org/
10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
Duhaime, Douglas. “PixPlot.” GitHub, Yale Digital Humanities Lab, 2017, https://github.com/
YaleDHLab/pix-plot.
Fielding, Raymond. “Newsreels.” Encyclopedia of Journalism, vol. 3, SAGE Publications, 2009, pp.
992–94.
Fitzpatrick, Sheila. Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary Times: Soviet Russia in the
1930s. Oxford University Press, 1999, https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780195050004.001.0001.
Gilburd, Eleonory. “The Revival of Soviet Internationalism in the Mid to Late 1950s.” The Thaw:
Soviet Society and Culture during the 1950s and 1960s, edited by Eleonory Gilburd and Denis
Kozlov, University of Toronto Press, 2013, pp. 362–401, https://doi.org/10.3138/
9781442661059-013.
---. To See Paris and Die. The Soviet Lives of Western Culture. The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674989771.
He, Kaiming, et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition.” arXiv, 10 Dec. 2015,
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1512.03385.
Heftberger, Adelheid. “Digital Humanities and Film Studies. Visualizing Dziga Vertov’s Work.”
Springer Link, Springer International Publishing, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-02864-0_4.
Hickethier, Knut. “The Creation of Cultural Identity through Weekly Newsreels in Germany in the
1950s: As Illustrated by the NEUE DEUTSCHE WOCHENSCHAU and the UFAWOCHENSCHAU (With a Side Glance at the DEFA Weekly Newsreel DER
AUGENZEUGE).” Constructions of Cultural Identities in Newsreel Cinema and Television after
1945, edited by Kornelia Imesch et al., 1st ed., vol. 17, transcript Verlag, 2016, pp. 39–54,
https://doi.org/10.14361/9783839429754-003.
Hielscher, Eva. “The Phenomenon of Interwar City Symphonies: A Combined Methodology of
Digital Tools and Traditional Film Analysis Methods to Study Visual Motifs and Structural
Patterns of Experimental-Documentary City Films.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 014, no.
4, Dec. 2020.
Impett, Leonardo, and Franco Moretti. “Totentanz. Operationalizing Aby Warburg’s
Pathosformeln.” Pamphlets of Stanford Literary Lab, no. Literary Lab Pamphlet 16, Nov. 2017,
pp. 1–10.
Karavaev, Dmitrii. “Syuzhety sovetskoi kinokhroniki o prazdnovanii iubileev oktiabrskoi revoliutsii
kak instrument formirovania istoricheskoi pamiati (in English: Soviet Newsreel Stories on the
Anniversaries of the 1917 October Revolution as Instrument of Development of Historical
Memory).” Mezhdunarodnyi zhurnal issledovanii kul’tury, vol. 2, no. 31, 2018,
https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/soviet-newsreel-stories-on-the-anniversaries-of-the-1917-octoberrevolution-as-instrument-of-development-of-historical-memory.
Karjus, Andres, et al. “Compression Ensembles Quantify Aesthetic Complexity and the Evolution
of Visual Art.” EJP Data Science, vol. 12, no. 21, 2023, pp. 1–23, https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/
s13688-023-00397-3.
Kowalsky, Daniel. “The Soviet Cinematic Offensive in the Spanish Civil War.” Film History, vol. 19,
no. 1, Mar. 2007, pp. 7–19. EBSCOhost, https://doi.org/10.2979/FIL.2007.19.1.7.
Kozlov, Denis. “Introduction.” The Thaw: Soviet Society and Culture during the 1950s and 1960s,
University of Toronto Press, 2013, pp. 3–17, https://doi.org/10.3138/9781442661059-004.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

32

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Kozlov, Denis, and Eleonory Gilburd. “The Thaw as an Event in Russian History.” The Thaw:
Soviet Society and Culture during the 1950s and 1960s, edited by Denis Kozlov and Eleonory
Gilburd, University of Toronto Press, 2013, pp. 18–81, https://doi.org/10.3138/
9781442661059-005.
Lee, Benjamin Charles Germain, et al. “The Newspaper Navigator Dataset: Extracting And
Analyzing Visual Content from 16 Million Historic Newspaper Pages in Chronicling America.”
arXiv.org, May 2020, http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.01583.
MacKay, John. “Allegory and Accommodation: Vertov’s Three Songs of Lenin (1934) as a Stalinist
Film.” Film History: An International Journal, vol. 18, no. 4, 2006, pp. 376–91.
MacKay, John, et al. “Matrices for Non-Fiction: Dziga Vertov and the Kino-Nedelia Newsreels.”
Researching Newsreels: Local, National and Transnational Case Studies, edited by Roel Vande
Winkel et al., Palgrave Macmillan, 2018, pp. 119–41.
Manovich, Lev. Cultural Analytics. MIT Press, 2020, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/
11214.001.0001.
Masson, Eef, et al. “Exploring Digitised Moving Image Collections: The SEMIA Project, Visual
Analysis and the Turn to Abstraction.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 014, no. 4, Dec.
2020.
McInnes, Leland, et al. “UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for Dimension
Reduction.” arXiv:1802.03426 [Cs, Stat], Sept. 2020, http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426.
McNair, Brian. Glasnost, Perestroika and the Soviet Media. Routledge, 2006, https://doi.org/
10.4324/9780203192191.
Mittell, Jason. “Deformin’ in the Rain: How (and Why) to Break a Classic Film.” Digital
Humanities Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 1, Mar. 2021, http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/15/
1/000521/000521.html.
Modeli sezona. Vesna—leto 1956. Izdanie Gosudarstvennogo nauchno-tehnicheskogo izdatel’stva
Ministerstva promyshlennosti SSSR, otvetstvennyi redaktor N.N. Nikiforov, Moskva, 1956.
Ohm, Tillmann, et al. “Collection Space Navigator: An Interactive Visualization Interface for
Multidimensional Datasets.” Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on Visual
Information Communication and Interaction (VINCI ’23), Association for Computing
Machinery, 2023, pp. 1–5, https://doi.org/10.1145/3615522.3615546.
Oiva, Mila, et al. “A Framework for the Analysis of Historical Newsreels.” Humanities and Social
Sciences Communications, vol. 11, no. 1, Apr. 2024, pp. 1–15, https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/
a4xsp.
Oiva, Mila, Hannu Salmi, et al. Yves Montand in the USSR: Cultural Diplomacy and Mixed
Messages. Palgrave Macmillan, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-69048-9.
Olesen, Christian Gosvig, et al. “Data-Driven Research for Film History: Exploring the Jean
Desmet Collection.” The Moving Image: The Journal of the Association of Moving Image
Archivists, vol. 16, no. 1, 2016, pp. 82–105. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.5749/
movingimage.16.1.0082.
Olesen, Christian Gosvig, and Ivan Kisjes. “From Text Mining to Visual Classification: Rethinking
Computational New Cinema History with Jean Desmet’s Digitised Business Archive.” TMG
Journal for Media History, vol. 21, no. 2, Nov. 2018, pp. 127–45, https://doi.org/10.18146/
2213-7653.2018.370.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

33

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Pozharliev, Lyubomir, and Danae Gallo González. “Martin Luther King’s Assassination in Spain’s
NO-DOs and in Bulgaria’s Kinopregledi.” Researching Newsreels: Local, National and
Transnational Case Studies, edited by Roel Vande Winkel et al., Palgrave Macmillan, 2018, pp.
93–117, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91920-1_6.
Protocols of the meetings of the Main Editorial Board of the Central Documentary Film Studios for
1955-1957. f. 2487 op. 1 ed. hr. 117. Russian State Archive of Literature and Art (RGALI).
Report 1956: “Report of film production at the Central studios of documentary film for year 1955 and
the first quarter of 1956, dated April 2, 1956.” f. 2487 op. 1 ed. hr. 22, pp. 9-11. Russian State
Archive of Literature and Art (RGALI).
Rose, Gillian. Visual Methodologies: An Introduction to Researching with Visual Materials. SAGE,
2016.
Roth-Ey, Kristin. Moscow Prime Time: How the Soviet Union Built the Media Empire That Lost the
Cultural Cold War. Cornell University Press, 2011.
Ruth, Nicolas. “From Clusters to Graphs – Toward a Scalable Viewing of News Videos.” GitHub,
2023, https://github.com/Nicolas-le/from-clusters-to-graphs.
Schwarz, Uta. “West German State Newsreels in the Period of the Economic Miracle 1950-1964:
Gender as an Open Approach.” Constructions of Cultural Identities in Newsreel Cinema and
Television after 1945, edited by Kornelia Imesch et al., 1st ed., vol. 17, transcript Verlag, 2016, pp.
55–80, https://doi.org/10.14361/9783839429754-004.
Shinn, Maxwell. “Phantom Oscillations in Principal Component Analysis.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, vol. 120, no. 48, Nov. 2023, p. e2311420120. pnas.org (Atypon),
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2311420120.
Vahtikari, Tanja, et al. “Valokuvan käytön ja tulkinnan menetelmät historiantutkimuksessa.”
Avaimia menneisyyteen — Opas historiantutkimuksen menetelmiin, edited by Mirkka
Danielsbacka et al., Gaudeamus, 2022, pp. 229–49, https://kauppa.gaudeamus.fi/sivu/tuote/
avaimia-menneisyyteen/4047622.
van der Maaten, Laurens, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Visualizing Data Using T-SNE.” Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 11, no. 9, 2008.
Veldi, Martti, et al. “Five-Year Plan in Four: Kolkhoz Propaganda in Film and Documentaries in
Estonia.” SHS Web of Conferences, vol. 63, 2019, p. 10002. www.shs-conferences.org,
https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/20196310002.
Vikulina, Ekaterina. “Vlast’ i media. Vizual’naja revoliutsija shestidesiatykh.” Cahiers du monde
russe, vol. 56, no. 2, Dec. 2015, pp. 429–66.
Warburg, Aby. Mnemosyne Atlas. 1927–1929.
Wattenberg, Martin, et al. “How to Use T-SNE Effectively.” Distill, vol. 1, no. 10, Oct. 2016, p. e2.
distill.pub, https://doi.org/10.23915/distill.00002.
Wevers, Melvin. “Scene Detection in De Boer Historical Photo Collection.” Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence (ICAART 2021), vol. 1, 2021, pp.
601–10, https://doi.org/10.5220/0010288206010610.
Wevers, Melvin, and Thomas Smits. “The Visual Digital Turn: Using Neural Networks to Study
Historical Images.” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, vol. 35, no. 1, Apr. 2020, pp. 194–207,
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqy085.
Williams, Mark, and John Bell. “The Media Ecology Project: Collaborative DH Synergies to
Produce New Research in Visual Culture History.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 015, no.
1, Mar. 2021.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

34

Soviet View of the World. Exploring Long-Term Visual Patterns in “Novosti dnia” Newsreel Journal (1945-1992)

Yurchak, Alexei. Everything Was Forever, Until It Was No More: The Last Soviet Generation.
Princeton University Press, 2005.
Zakharova, Larissa. “Dior in Moscow: A Taste for Luxury in Soviet Fashion Under Khrushchev.”
Pleasures in Socialism: Leisure and Luxury in the Eastern Bloc, edited by Susan E. Reid and David
Crowley, Northwestern University Press, 2010, pp. 94–119.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

35

