Clariana-Rodagut, Ainamar, and Alessio Cardillo. “Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation
in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A
Network-Science Proposal.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 4, July 2024,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.118589.

ARTICLE

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture
During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A Network-Science
Proposal
Ainamar Clariana-Rodagut1,2 , Alessio Cardillo1
1 Universitat Oberta de Catalunya -- Internet interdisciplinarily Institute (IN3), Barcelona, Spain, 2 Philipps-Universität Marburg, Marburg, Germany

Keywords: film field, cinema history, women, gender approaches, social network analysis, Iberoamerica, film culture, heterogeneous data
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.118589

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 4, 2024

The research presented here uses the tools of social network analysis to
empirically show a socio-cultural phenomenon already addressed by the social
sciences and history: the historical marginalisation of women in the field of
cinema. The novelty of our approach lies in the use of a large amount of
heterogeneous historical data. On the one hand, we built a network of
interactions between people involved in the film field in Ibero-America during
the first half of the twentieth century. On the other hand, we propose a k-core
decomposition and a multi-layered analysis, as a quantitative way to study the
position of women within the cultural melieu. After conducting our analysis,
we concluded that women were mostly situated in the outer k-shells of the
empirical network, and their distribution was not uniform across the k-shells.
From a qualitative perspective, these results can be interpreted as the
consequence of the lack of evidence of the participation of women in the public
sphere.

1. Introduction
The digital humanities blossomed as a discipline in the early twenty-first
century. Since then, a multitude of methods from the computational sciences
have been imported to the humanities. Digital tools have been successfully
used in a plethora of disciplines, including history, philosophy, philology, and
cultural studies, to analyse large amounts of data that would be impossible
to manage using traditional tools. This has allowed for the discovery of
new patterns and unidentified phenomena (Schich et al.; Fraiberger et al.;
Brughmans; Fulminante et al.). Nonetheless – to the best of our knowledge
– network analysis has barely been applied to the study of film history. The
research presented here seeks to fill this knowledge gap and uses the tools of
social network analysis to empirically explore a socio-cultural phenomenon
that has already been studied in the social sciences and history, namely, the
historical marginalisation of women in the cinema field. Yet, the novelty of
our approach lies in the use of a large amount of heterogeneous, historical
data and in our proposed method to analyse the position of women within
social networks linked to the cultural field. This approach allows us to

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

highlight certain yet-unknown nuances of marginalisation and tie them to the
network’s structural properties and the nature of the connections composing
it.
Our analysis has two goals. On the one hand, we seek to detect the social
position of women in the cultural medium, specifically regarding film, in
Ibero-America over the first half of the twentieth century, as per the data
compiled in our database. To do so, we apply social network analysis and
use a gender perspective and a relational approach. On the other hand,
we propose using k-core decomposition and multi-layered analysis as a
quantitative way of analysing the marginal position of women in the cultural
milieu.
The data we rely on for our analysis comes from a dataset comprising data
on women who participated in the Ibero-American film field during the first
half of the twentieth century. This dataset was extracted from the database
created by the participants of the ERC project “Social Networks of the
Past: Mapping Hispanic and Lusophone Literary Modernity, 1898-1959” and
members of the GlobaLS research group. Our dataset was built as part of
the cinema and the women-focused subprojects of the larger, aforementioned
ERC project.
The methodological proposal and analysis undertaken for this paper are the
result of a joint effort between a complex systems scientist and a humanist
deploying the gender perspective who specialises in cinema studies.
Interdisciplinarily, we seek to detect the influential women in our database.
From a qualitative perspective, it is generally accepted that historiography
has invisibilized women who worked in the film field during the silent and
1
early cinema periods. It means that the data we gathered for the proposed
framework are scarce and sparse. Even so, we believe that 1) quantitative
methods can contribute to the discussion around why women suffer
marginalisation, and that 2) network science can also propose different ways
to tackle the historical roles played by women in the cultural field. This paper
aims to empirically show how marginalisation conditioned them.
By visualising the roles and positions women had in the networks, we pose
the following research questions. Firstly, were the women peripheral? After
exploring this question and realising that women were effectively situated at
the margins of our network – even when deploying the gender perspective
and positive discrimination in the data-gathering process, we ask, what was

1 In our case, this lack of data is exacerbated by our geographical context of focus, which has been considered peripheral by film historians. See

for example Richard Abel’s Encyclopedia of Early Cinema (2004), in which entries on filmmakers are organised according to the countries
where they worked, with the number of filmmakers from the United States towering over other countries. Also, these data records contain
far fewer women than men. For recent work recovering the stories of women in silent cinema, see the Women Film Pioneers project.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

the quantitative effect of marginalisation? To this end, we use k-core
decomposition as a suitable method for quantitatively analysing the
peripheral position of women in our networks.
This method allows us to see that women were mostly situated in the outer
k-shells of the empirical network, and their distribution was not uniform
across the k-shells. In contrast, the random counterpart networks display a
more even distribution of women across the k-shells. Therefore, we postulate
that there was a social force pushing women to the outskirts of the network.
In light of our results, we consider that the marginalisation effect is not
due to mere chance but, instead, to the way the cultural field is structured
and behaves when analysed as a network. From a qualitative perspective,
these results can be interpreted as the consequence of the lack of data on
women. This does not imply in any way that women did not occupy key
roles in the institutionalisation process that took place in the film field.
A plausible argument regarding this scarcity of data hinges on women’s
disproportionately low occupation of positions in the public sphere,
compared to their dense fabric of relations and collaborations in the private
spheres. As the majority of data we rely on has been gathered from
publications and official documents, they fail to grasp the exchanges that
took place in private spheres (Arendt). To address the data’s scarcity, we have
developed certain data-gathering strategies, such as building ego-networks
around certain key women mediators and then paying special attention
to their female collaborators. Alternatively, we may assign a category to
relationships in our database to add women for whom we do not have
information other than their relationship (including marriage) with a man
who occupied a relevant position in the cultural field of that time. Using
our historical knowledge, we also structured the data in order to highlight
the names of women on whom no further meta-information was available.
One strategy we followed when considering distinct types of interactions
was to convert each type into a separate network, to retrieve all the women
who had personal relationships with other well-known people who swayed
great symbolic power in the film and cultural field. We made this decision
considering that most women in relationships with a male artists or
intellectuals would have probably carried out relevant activities too.

2. Methodology
Perspectives
As this paper includes the word “women” in its title, we must reflect upon
what we mean by this category. First of all, it is crucial to state that most
of the women we are referring to were white and came from upper- and
middle-class backgrounds. This, in fact, conditioned women’s survival in the
intellectual and cultural fields. Although, on the one hand, their condition
as women inevitably limited their social roles, their position was, on the
other hand, very privileged compared to that of other women who were not
Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

white or from the upper-middle class. Silvia Federici notes that as long as the
sexual division of labour in the framework of analysis remained as powerful
as it had been since the emergence of capitalism, the concept “women”
remains a useful category for analysis. Federici’s work has led us to realise
the importance of women’s strategies to legitimise their voices and work in
the cinema field. One shared experience among most of the women in our
database was their fight against the roles imposed on them. Their struggle
for emancipation indicates that, for all of them, there in fact was a clear
definition of what it meant to be a woman, a category they often referred
to and described in their works. Given the cultural environment they were
raised in, they were told that their primary duty as women was to marry
and care for the other members of their families. In one way or another,
most of the women we have data on fought against this imposition. The
crux of their struggle involved avoiding the reproductive labour they were
destined for, resulting in social rejection. Nevertheless, the very privileged
environment they were part of helped these women boost their productivity
in the artistic and cultural fields as a direct consequence of their rejection
(Clariana-Rodagut and Roig-Sanz). In this sense, these women could occupy
social positions that were previously barred from women, thanks to their
newfound freedom.
Comparing men and women is useful as long as we use it to describe the
differences themselves and their implications, but comparison proves useless
if we assume that men and women operated under equal conditions and
thus expect equal, or even comparable, results. In no way can the public
roles of the women at hand be approached using the same methods we
would use to analyse men’s contributions within the same context. Although
men’s contributions have always been historically acknowledged, women’s
contributions did not receive the same praise because of their limited access to
the public sphere. Therefore, if women’s contributions were to be compared
to their male counterparts’ using the same tools of measurement, women
would always appear less relevant – or gifted – in the history of culture. The
above reasoning has led us to work on certain compensation strategies which,
taken together, make up the method of analysis we propose in this paper.

Data
Our analysis leverages our research group’s data, which is stored in the
Nodegoat Virtual Research Environment. The database has been filled and
enriched since 2019 and, therefore, is the result of the collaboration between
current and past members of our research group. We believe it is important
to be clear about the work involved in compiling data, given that such
labour is often invisibilized, as noted by Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren
Klein in their book Data Feminism (2019). This invisibility implies that the
places from which datasets are built are rarely acknowledged. Thus, little
responsibility tends to be assumed around the biases affecting data-collection,
cleaning, and systematisation processes. While knowledge should always be
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

situated (Haraway), it is imperative that we specify our places of enunciation
as researchers. This means that we must take responsibility for our biases,
recognize what is being left out and what we are taking for granted, and
clarify where the data were gathered and what procedure was used to extract
them. The goal of such a process is to avoid what Haraway calls “the god
trick,” that is, the deployment of a perspective that is situated nowhere,
presuming that what we are showing reflects reality, instead of reflecting just
one of its parts, our version of it. We aim to steer clear of the idea that the data
cannot lie.
Thus, it is worth mentioning that the data-compiling team operates from
the south of the Global North and that the team’s salaries are paid by a
prestigious funding institution, the European Research Council. The means
available to conduct our research are greater than average. Most of the people
who have taken part in gathering our data are cisgender and white, and come
from middle-class backgrounds. The data are biassed by our own standpoint.
The project behind the data collection, “Social Networks of the Past:
Mapping Hispanic and Lusophone Literary Modernity (1989-1959),”
consists of four research lines. These lines investigate cultural assets in the
Ibero-America of the first half of the twentieth century. We aim at finding
the mediators who spearheaded the exchange of material (e.g., books) and
inmaterial (e.g., ideas) goods, but also the circulation of people. We posit that
these relationships and exchanges provide the best windows to understanding
the contribution that Ibero-America made in the building of artistic
modernity. Our main research objects are 1) translations in cultural and
literary historical journals, 2) the International Committee of Intellectual
Cooperation of the League of Nations, 3) film criticism in specialised and
cultural historical journals, and 4) women of the first Ibero-American film
clubs. The information we gathered involves human and non-human agents
and agencies (Latour), and using the actor-network theory’s tenet “follow
the actor,” all the agents found during our source’s harvesting phase were
uploaded into our database to unveil the networks around our objects.
Therefore, in our database, we can find data on associations (for example,
linked to historical journals), cultural events, and people. We also have data
on people with whom the participants of our main objects exchanged letters
and who collaborated in books and articles published by our human actors.
Given our data’s intrinsic heterogeneity, our sources are varied, as they
come from primary sources and secondary bibliography. Primary sources
can be located in personal, municipal, and national archives, or in historical
publications, thus including correspondence, historical documents, pictures,
2
exhibition catalogues, member lists, etc.

2 These are some of the most relevant sources for each case study. For María Luz Morales’s case study, we included data from Cabré, Codina

Canet, Fulcarà Torroella, González Naranjo, Morales and Cabré, Pérez-Villanueva Tovar, Real Mercadal, and Zulueta, as well as from the
articles she published in newspapers and journals, and from newspaper reports published in La Vanguardia. For Lola Álvarez Bravo’s case

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

One of the consequences of using heterogeneous sources is that we fed the
records on the relationships based on participation in events and publications.
Yet, we do not possess data on associations’ every event but, in most cases,
we have data on just a few events organised by a subset of associations.
Likewise, the information does not cover every actor at a specific event or
association, but only those we managed to find in the sources we had access
to. Most of the data in this paper has been manually gathered. During the
data harvest and uploading, each member of the team added descriptors using
well-established concepts from their own fields of expertise. For instance,
we have included the descriptor “cinema” to describe a given event’s topic,
the specialisation of a journal, or the main topic of a specific text. These
descriptors are written in English – as this is our research group’s
communication language – and in Spanish – the main vehicular language
used by the agents and agencies we work with.
Data heterogeneity also affects the types of relationships we establish between
actors. The plurality of sources and people who have extracted/curated the
data may also lead to inconsistencies, which we have tried to mitigate through
constant verification. The metadata available on each human actor can also
vary. In this sense, the invisibilisation of women in cultural history, and
the consequent paucity of data on them, is worth mentioning. Therefore,
regarding the human actors, we have considered meta-information on gender,
name (first and last), and professional or participation-related ties to
magazines, events, publications, and institutions, when available. We have
also included personal relationships for the most prominent people in our
database, that is, the ones we have been extensively working on from a
qualitative point of view.
To address the lack of data on women, we have created a category on
relationships (either personal or professional) in our database. Although we
do not always possess the empirical evidence (e.g., an article, photo, or list
of collaborators) of the professional relationship between two agents, when
working with women it is essential that we include the self-reflexive and
personal texts in which these women declare their professional or personal
relationship with certain relevant actors in the cultural or cinematographic
3
fields. In our category “relationships,” we have selected only personal,
romantic relationships (e.g., wife-husband, or unmarried couple) and those
defined as professional relationships. Such a selection is based on our
knowledge of the historical context. Our expertise, in fact, leads us to believe

study, we gathered data from Álvarez Bravo, Debroise, Fuentes Rojas, Poniatowska, and Rodríguez Álvarez. For the Victoria Ocampo case
study, we included data from Artundo et al., Leston, Liendo, and Ocampo (Testimonios. Primera serie; Ocampo, Testimonios. Segunda serie;
Ocampo, Testimonios. Quinta serie (1950-1957); Ocampo, Victoria Ocampo. Correspondencia; Ocampo, Autobiografía). We have included
data from Ocampo’s correspondence published by the Houghton Library in the collection Victoria Ocampo papers. We also added the data
published by Benedict on Ocampo’s publishing house and journal Sur.
3 See Diana Anselmo and Amelie Hastie.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

that women married to “prominent” men almost always worked in their
4
shadows. See, for instance, the case of Lola Álvarez Bravo. Concerning
professional relationships, we have traced them thanks to primary sources
(e.g., self-reflexive texts) or other sources (e.g., photographs), providing
empirical evidence of the existence of a relationship between two (or more)
people.
In sum, the main criterion to select relevant data within the whole dataset
stored in Nodegoat was that the agents had to have some relationship with
the film field. This criterion entails the selection of those institutions
(journals, film clubs, federations, etc.), events, and people that played a role
or were related to the film field, with the latter having worked or somehow
participated in any such events, institutions, and journals. Our decision is
based upon the paucity of data and the need to work with indirect data.
Thus, even if for some people we only have data related to a single event, we
will still consider them actors tied to the film field. In the next section, we
provide a detailed description of how each channel (or type) of interaction
has been defined and subsequently used to generate a network of people.

Channels of Interaction
In mathematical terms, a graph (or network) is an object made of a certain
number of points (denoted by ) called nodes or vertices, connected by a
given number of edges or links (whose number is equal to ) (Latora et al.).
The number of connections of a node is called its degree, and we denote it as
. An isolated node is a node with no connections. We use the term path to
indicate the sequence of edges (or nodes) that needs to be crossed to go from
the path’s origin to its destination. A connected component of a graph is the set
of mutually reachable nodes via a path. The biggest component in the graph
is called its giant component (Latora et al.).
Below we present how each channel (i.e., type) of interaction was used to
build the corresponding network. Each of these networks can be thought of
either as an independent entity or, alternatively, as a subnetwork (i.e., a layer)
of a multiplex/multilayer network (Bianconi).

collective bodies
Given the list of all the collective bodies available in our database, we:

4 Other members of the Mexican group of artists surrounding Lola Álvarez Bravo include Graciela Amador Sandoval and Isabel Villaseñor

(respectively, David Alfaro Siqueiros’s and Gabriel Fernández Ledesma’s wives) (Cueva Tazzer). The latter – according to Lola Álvarez Bravo
– died because her husband did not let her out of the house or let her be as creative as she needed (Poniatowska). There was also Elena
Garro (Octavio Paz’s wife), whose husband forced her to burn her own writing due to his jealousy of her skills (Paz Garro). In the circle of
intellectuals tied to the Lyceum club in Madrid we may find María Lejárraga, the ghostwriter for her husband, the well known Gregorio
Martínez Sierra (Lizárraga Vizcarra). For further references of women artists whose work was underrepresented by their husbands, refer to
Grosenick or Birrell.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

1. Selected those collective bodies (CB) for which the field “Kind of
organisation” contained one of the following terms: ‘Cine’, ‘cine’,
‘Ciné’, ‘ciné’, ‘Film’, and ‘film’. This operation yielded all the CB
classified as ‘Film Club’, ‘Film Archive’, ‘Venue’, and ‘Film
Distributor’.
2. Selected those CB whose field “Name” contained one of the
following terms: ‘Cine’, ‘cine’, ‘Ciné’, ‘ciné’, ‘Film’, and ‘film’.
These steps allowed us to select, overall, 422 CB. Then, for each CB, ,
we extracted the set,
, of people involved with their activities but
classified as prominent figures (e.g., founders, organisers, managers, treasurers,
etc.) or playing a relevant role (for instance, presenters, guests, authors, etc.)
within them. Then, given the set
, we added an edge between each
pair of elements. By considering only prominent figures, we ensured that the
interactions we captured were those among people who were committed to
the activities organised by the CB and therefore would have met at some
point. That said, it is worth stressing that such an assumption implies that
each CB’s prominent figure took part in all its activities (which might not
always have been the case).

events
Given the list of all the events available in our database, we:
1. Selected those whose field “Subject” contains the word ‘Cinema’.
2. Selected those whose field “Name” contained one of the following
5
terms: ‘cine’, ‘film’, ‘pelicula’, and ‘proyecci’.
These steps allowed us to select 99 events (EV). Then, for each EV, , we
extracted the set,
, of its participants, and added a connection between
each possible pair of them. It is worth noting that some EV’s participant list
consists of only one – or no – person. When we only found one person, the
node corresponding to the sole participant was added to the network without
any edge connecting it.

publications
Given the complete list of all publications available in our database, we:
1. Selected those whose field “Genre” corresponded to ‘Film’.
2. Selected those whose field “Title” contained either the word ‘film’
6
or the word ‘cine’.

5 The match is case insensitive.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

3. Selected those whose field “Journal name” contained one of the
7
following terms: ‘film’, and ‘cine’.
Using these criteria, we selected 64 publications (PUB). From these PUB
we extracted the set of journals where they were published (a total of
16), and created a set,
, of people associated with each journal, ,
either due to authorship or, for those related to cinema, due to the role
they played within them. For the latter, we selected those whose role is
one of the following: ‘Director’, ‘Editor’, ‘Co-director’, ‘Editor in chief’,
‘Co-founder’, and ‘Founder’. This approach allows us to grasp not only
authorship relationships but also – and most importantly – relationships
between authors and editors. Indeed, many publications in specialised
journals were submitted thanks to direct invitations from the editor, thus
implying the existence of a relationship between editors and authors. We also
assume that the people publishing pieces on cinema were interested in cinema
as well.

relationships
Given the list of people involved in CB, EV, or PUB relationships, we
extracted the list of (pairwise) personal relationships (REL) of the type
‘Spouse’, ‘Unmarried partner’, and ‘Professional’. This step led us to include
people not belonging to the CB, EV, and PUB relationships. Such a selection
criterion translated into 601 connections.

epistolary correspondence
Given the list of people involved in CB, EV, PUB, and REL, we searched
through our epistolary database once again and added epistolary
correspondence (COR) only if both the sender and the receiver belonged
to the aforementioned list of people. We decided not to include all the
correspondence from our database because we did not want to add new
actors who were not connected to the cinema field to our network. Rather,
we deemed only those actors with a role in the cinema field to have played a
role in the articulation of the field in itself.
Table 1 summarises the main structural features of these networks,
comprising the number of nodes, , of edges, , the maximum number of
connections per node,
, the number of connected components,
,
(i.e., pieces of the network in which it is possible to go from every node
to every other node within it), the number of isolated nodes,
, and
the relative size of the giant component, , (i.e., the percentage of nodes

6 The match is case insensitive.
7 The match is case insensitive.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

Table 1. Structural features of the networks used in our study. See the main text for the details.
Network
REL

1367

601

75

783

412

6.95

4

COR

1367

101

91

1269

1268

7.24

2

CB

1367

1315

23

1136

1101

1.76

20

PUB

1367

244

18

1323

1317

1.39

16

EV

1367

1898

95

1258

1250

7.02

58

ALL

1367

4090

117

373

37

36.72

58

belonging to the biggest connected component in the graph) (Latora et al.).
We also computed the same indicators for the network merging together all
the layers (ALL).

Brief Introduction to Mathematical Concepts
jaccard index
Using different networks accounting for distinct channels of interaction raises
the question of whether the connections grasped by each network are the
same or not (and to what extent). One way to quantify the redundancy of
the information encoded in two layers of a multiplex network is to compute
the Jaccard index of their edges’ sets (Bianconi). Given two generic sets 𝛼 and
𝛽, their Jaccard index (Jaccard), J, can be computed mathematically:

The numerator
indicates the number of elements belonging both
to sets and . The denominator
, instead, denotes the number of
elements belonging to either set 𝛼 or . The structure of Eq. (1) implies
that the values of
can span from zero to one. A value of
indicates that the two sets have exactly the same elements (i.e., one is an exact
copy of the other), whereas
indicates that the two sets do not
have any element in common (i.e., they are completely different). A value of
between zero and one indicates, instead, a certain degree of similarity
between the two sets, with values of
close to one denoting high
similarity and those close to zero denoting low similarity.

-core decomposition
As we are interested in pinpointing those women who played a relevant role
in cultural mediation in the Ibero-American film field of the first half of the
twentieth century, we can leverage the network’s formalism to identify them,
pushing our analysis beyond dyadic interactions by considering mesoscopic
structures – i.e., coherent structures made by groups of nodes. Amidst the
plethora of possible mesoscopic structures (Lambiotte et al.), we decided
to focus on a type of core-periphery structure called k-core decomposition
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

(Borgatti and Everett; Seidman; Kong et al.). Such a technique has proven
useful in a variety of domains (Carmi et al.; Morone et al.; Kong et al.), but
one in particular is especially appealing for our case. It turns out that k-core
decomposition identifies the most influential spreaders in a network more
efficiently than by ranking them according to, for instance, their number
of connections (Kitsak et al.). Cultural mediators, like the women we are
working on, can be taken, to a certain extent, as spreaders in the sense that
they played the key role of mediating between spheres and cultures. In this
sense we considered the ability to spread (as defined by network science)
as similar to mediation (as defined by the social sciences) (Roig-Sanz and
Meylaerts). This underpins our choice of using k-core decomposition to
pinpoint women cultural mediators.
The k-core decomposition of a network is an iterative pruning process
decomposing it into a set of concentric (i.e., onionlike) k-shells. The algorithm
consists in recursively removing the nodes having less than k connections (i.e.,
8
first
, then
, and so on). Under this assumption, a k-shell is the set
of nodes belonging to the k-th core but not to the (k + 1)-th core (that is why
the structure is akin to that of an onion). The k-shell index, , of the deepest
k-shell available for graph (i.e., its maximum on the graph
) is
called its degeneracy, .
Given the aforementioned properties of the k-core decomposition, we studied
the fraction of nodes of each gender in each k-shell. To ensure that our
observations are not the result of mere chance, we compared them to their
analogue, measured in a randomised version of the network.

graph randomisation
Given a network with nodes and edges,
, the randomisation
process generates a network
which, besides the number of nodes
and edges, also preserves each node’s number of connections. Such a random
counterpart can be obtained from network
using the edge-swapping
rewiring mechanism proposed by Fosdick et al., developed from the
configuration method (Molloy and Reed). In a nutshell, the edge-swapping
method selects uniformly at random two edges,
and
, of the
network , and replaces them – if they do not exist already, or generate
self-loops – with either pair
or, alternatively, with the pair
. Both replacements ensure the conservation of each node’s
degree. For this study, we repeated the edge-swap step several times to ensure

8 These nodes could originally have more than k connections, but the removal of other nodes connected to them decreases their effective

number of connections.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

that the final network
was sufficiently distinct from the original
one. We repeated the whole randomisation procedure several times (in our
case, 50) to ensure the statistical significance of our results.

3. Results
Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation Using k-core
Decomposition
One way of quantifying the marginalisation of women in the film field is
to study their presence – and abundance – across the network’s k-shells, as
outer ones tend to be populated mainly by nodes belonging to the network’s
outskirts, whereas deeper k-shells are populated by more influential spreaders,
which also tend to occupy central positions in the network. To this end, we
have built a network – labelled as ALL – obtained by collapsing together all
the layers (i.e., the REL, COR, CB, PUB, and EV networks) of the multiplex
network. The collapse of distinct layers into a single network implies that
the presence of an edge in the ALL network stems from its existence in, at
least, one of the layers. Table 1 summarises the structural features of the ALL
network. Upon inspection, we may highlight that the number of edges, ,
and the size of the biggest connected component, , are considerably larger
than those of the single layers. These differences, combined with the smaller
number of connected components,
, and isolated nodes,
, tell us
that the ALL network is considerably more cohesive than the layers’ networks
when taken separately. With this picture in mind, we can study the k-core
decomposition of the ALL network. Specifically, for each k-shell, we have
9
counted its number of nodes classified either as men, women or “unknown”
10
and divided such numbers by the total number of nodes in the k-shell.
The left panel of Fig. 1 displays the fraction of women, men, and unknown
people present in each k-shell of the empirical network. Notably, the women
tend to concentrate in a few k-shells, especially in the outer – and shallower
– ones. However, the same analysis performed on the randomised networks
delivers a distinct picture. By glancing at the right panel of Fig. 1, we notice
how women’s presence tends to be more widespread across all the k-shells.
The fraction of women appearing in a k-shell appears more homogeneous in
the random counterpart than in the empirical network. These features make
us suspect that there could be some kind of “force” exacerbating women’s
marginalisation by pushing them towards k-shells where their influence as
cultural mediators is weaker.

9 We use this category to indicate the lack of metadata on the gender of a person.
10 This procedure ensures that the sum of the fractions of men, women, and unknown nodes of a given k-shell is always equal to one.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

Figure 1. Organization of the nodes grouped by gender across the k-shells.
The horizontal axis indicates the k-shell index, , whereas the vertical axis denotes the fraction of nodes with a given
gender in each k-shell (inner k-shells are the most central ones). The left panel displays the results for the empirical ALL
network, whereas the right panel displays the case of the random counterpart (results are averaged over 50 realisations of
the rewiring process).

Decoupling the Source of Marginalisation
The marginalisation of women within the k-core decomposition observed
in the ALL network (displayed in Fig. 1) raises the question of whether
such a phenomenon stems directly from a single – or a few – channels of
interaction or is due to their interplay. It has been proved that the structural
features of networks obtained by merging together the layers of a multiplex
network can be quite different from those of their layers considered singularly
(Cardillo et al.). To find whether marginalisation is directly related to the
multilayered nature of our system, we leveraged the full structure of the
multiplex network and repeated our analysis of each of the layers separately.
Such a procedure allows us to understand how marginalisation affected
women in different facets of their activities (i.e., channels of interaction). We
hypothesise that each channel of interaction would show different levels of
marginalisation depending on the type of interaction involved: more private
channel of interaction (such as COR or REL) would display smaller levels of
marginalisation among women, whereas a more public channel of interaction
(e.g., EV) would reveal higher levels of marginalisation.
To quantify the overlap of information in each layer pair, we use Eq. (1) to
compute the pairwise Jaccard index
between layers 𝛼 and . Figure
2 shows the heatmap matrix of the values of computed for all the pairs
of layers. Except for the elements of the main diagonal (comparing a layer
with itself, thus translating to a value of
) all the remaining values of
are quite small. This means that the amount of redundant (i.e., overlapping)
information encoded in our layer networks is quite small, ranging between
Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

Figure 2. Heatmap matrix encoding the values of the Jaccard score,
and corresponding to the layers of the multiplex network.

, computed between pairs of networks 𝛼

Light shades denote small similarities, whereas those on the diagonal are by definition equal to one. The symmetry of
allows us to display only the matrix’s upper half.

0.0 and 0.031. In other words, our layer networks are quite distinct from
one another. Such differences justify the use of multiplex network formalism
(Bianconi).
To delve into the source of women’s marginalisation, for each of the layer
networks, including the ALL one, we computed the difference between
the empirical fraction of women belonging to a given k-shell,
, and
the same quantity computed in the randomised networks,
(see Figure
3). Specifically, for each network
we computed the difference
for each k-shell available. A positive difference (i.e.,
) indicates that for that k-shell, there are (proportionately) more
women in the empirical network than in the random counterpart.
Conversely, a negative difference (i.e.,
) indicates that – on average –
the random counterpart has proportionately more women than the empirical
one. Finally, a difference equal to zero (i.e.,
) indicates that the
fraction of women in that k-shell is the same in both the empirical and the
random networks.
By inspecting Figure 3, we may highlight a few remarkable features. First,
random networks tend to have a shallower k-shell structure than their
empirical counterparts. The red star indicates the position of the value of
the degeneracy for random networks,
. We notice how for all networks
(except the COR one),
is smaller than in the empirical case (see also

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

Figure 3. Differences between the fraction of women nodes belonging to each k-shell,
, and its average counterpart computed in a randomly rewired network,
.

, of the empirical network,

Each panel accounts for a distinct network, whether the whole network (ALL) or a single layer (REL, COR, CB, PUB,
and EV). The red star indicates the deepest k-shell (i.e., the network’s degeneracy ( )) obtained in the random network
counterpart
, whereas the dashed line denotes the k-shells for which only the empirical value,
, exists. Random
values are obtained by averaging the results over 50 realisations.

Table 1). Such a recoil has been observed already in empirical and artificial
networks (Malvestio et al.) and is due to the shattering of tightly knit groups
of nodes (e.g., communities) operated by the random rewiring mechanism.
Another feature of Fig. 3 is that marginalisation occurs mainly in the EV
layer but also in the PUB and CB layers. In contrast, it is absent in those
layers corresponding to “private” interaction channels, such as REL or COR.
These opposite behaviours originate from the intrinsic nature of the EV,
PUB, and CB networks, which proceed from the projection of two-mode
networks (i.e., networks with two types of nodes with connections existing
only between nodes of different type) into single-mode networks rich with
cliques (i.e., groups of nodes all connected with each other). This dichotomy
suggests that public interactions were more prone to marginalise women than
those occurring in the private sphere. This is why it is crucial that we compare
the single-mode networks’ results (COR and REL) to those of two-mode
networks (EV, PUC, and CB) and give them the same value when analysing
women’s contributions to the cultural field. Finally, we observe how the
collapse of the available interactions’ channels into a single layer gives rise
to a less defined marginalisation scenario than when the layers’ networks are
studied independently.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

4. Conclusions
The methods proposed in this manuscript can help us quantitatively
understand the marginalisation of women in the Ibero-American film field of
the first half of the twentieth century. The novel and valuable nature of this
joint research effort does not lie in a discovery but, rather, in a methodological
proposal combining quantitative tools of social network analysis with a
feminist perspective in the field of historical cultural phenomena. A growing
number of studies are analysing data from several cultural and social fields
through the lenses of gender and social networks analysis (Smith-Doerr;
Lutter; Morgan et al.; Macedo et al.; Wapman et al.; Herrera-Guzmán et al.).
Data science has also been applied to the study of the history of cinema,
especially the history of reception, exhibition, and distribution practices
(Maltby et al.). Nontheless, only a few works apply social network analysis
tools to the study of cinema history, though they only use contemporary
data (Verhoeven et al.; Loist and Samoilova). In this sense, the exceptionality
of our research lies in the combination of applying social network analysis
methods to historical data from cinema and cultural history while deploying
the gender perspective.
One of the main results of our work is the empirical confirmation of existing
qualitative knowledge, namely, that during the first decades of the twentieth
century, women were rather marginalised from the cultural public sphere.
This phenomenon is easily traceable in the literary and publishing world
(King; Kowaleski-Wallace). However, the same conclusion holds for cinema
history in the same period, as publications and the creation of theoretical
film knowledge through publications were particularly relevant both in the
emergence of film cultures (Navitski and Poppe), as well as in the process
of institutionalisation of the film field (Bourdieu). Yet, the theoretical and
historical knowledge generated in spaces in which women often participated
collectively, such as film clubs, ended up being attributed to individual,
usually male, authors. Likewise, the events organised around the medium
– like competitions and festivals – and their “visible figures” would stand
as cornerstones in the institutionalisation of a field that was not yet
professionalised. As Mary Beard pointed out in her classic text, certain
mechanisms in Western culture, from its foundation, have hindered and
continue to hinder women’s access to the spheres of power. This means that
a big part of the cultural activity women performed occurred in the private
spheres.
After using affirmative-action strategies in the data-collection process, as well
as in the data’s systematisation and analysis, our quantitative analysis has
bolstered this idea. The first strategy was to use the Latourian method
for building networks and to trace the relationships starting with historical
female agents. After that, we used the Latourian method of “follow the
actor,” consisting in choosing case studies around which to build networks.
We selected the case studies after qualitative historical research and now, after
Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

qualitative analysis, we have the certainty that those cultural mediators were
relevant within the historical period under analysis. Despite the differences
between the actor-network and the networks from graph theory, certain
similarities allow us to use graphs to study social phenomena, as proposed by
Venturini et al.. Here, we go one step further by leveraging tools from both
approaches to reach our goal: to analyse the marginalisation of women in a
specific historical-cultural context.
Another strategy we used to trace women in the data-structuring process
was to add the category “relationships.” The main purpose of this strategy
was to introduce information on personal and work relationships mentioned
in underexplored historical sources, whose legitimacy has been neglected
until now. After conducting qualitative research within our framework, we
discovered that most of the women who were married or who were lovers
of men playing a prominent role in the cultural fields carried out relevant
11
cultural activities as well. Furthermore, some evidence, such as photographs
from the period, show that the participation of women in spaces considered
12
eminently masculine in historiography was actually quite high. However,
as a consequence of the structural chauvinism affecting historiography, some
evidence had not been fully considered in the histories of Ibero-American
cinema.
Despite the aforementioned compensation strategies, the data used to carry
out our study remains limited and very heterogeneous. The former, as
expected, stems from the little attention these women have received from
historiography. This is relevant because only by scraping data from different
fields and disciplines can we prove the relevance of the cultural mediators we
are studying (Roig-Sanz and Meylaerts). We decided to use the multilayer
network formalism and combine it with k-core decomposition to address the
data’s heterogeneity. Although we do not have access to information on every
woman’s connection, we still had key information assisting us in investigating
the roles women played in the network. For example, we possessed data on
relevant connections, or on key events or organisations they took part in.
Their strategic positions, allowing us to label them as cultural mediators, were
as important – or more so – as the number of connections they had. If we
would have analysed their relevance looking exclusively at their number of

11 For instance, the work of Lola Álvarez Bravo was considered irrelevant for Mexican culture until the '80s, the decade of her death. The most

well-known examples in Spain include las Sinsombrero, who adopted prominent roles in the cultural and intellectual fields of the Spanish
pre-Civil War period, whose contributions had not been acknowledged until very recently (Alonso Valero; Balló). These women were either
close friends, lovers, or spouses of the intellectuals and male artists of the Generación del 27, or were close to the Residencia de Estudiantes.
While the male artists and intellectuals close to these groups have been prominently studied by cultural historians for a long time, women
who also took part in the same cultural fields have been completely neglected. We might mention Teresa de León, Concha Méndez, and
María Luisa Muñoz de Vargas (spouses of Rafael Alberti, Manuel Altoaguirre, and Rogelio Buendía, respectively), or Maruja Mallo and
Margarita Manso (close friends of Salvador Dalí and Federico García Lorca). The same pattern can be spotted in similar frameworks.
Women who were surrealist artists and intellectuals were invisibilised by cultural historians and overshadowed by their male counterparts,
including Leonora Carrington and Dora Maar (respectively, Max Ernst and Picasso’s lovers).
12 Such as the first Western film clubs (Clariana-Rodagut).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

connections, they would have appeared much less relevant to cultural history
than their male counterparts. In contrast, by considering their mediating
roles, we have assessed their contributions to the cultural field in a fairer way.
In network analysis, a proxy to measure mediating abilities is to measure the
ability to diffuse information efficiently (Kitsak et al.) and keep the system
united as a whole (Carmi et al.; Kong et al.), thus allowing us to use the k-core
decomposition method.
Our choice to work with a multi-layered network is based on two factors:
first, it has preserved all the channels of interaction that we deemed relevant,
keeping us from losing any of the mediating facets or roles that these women
played in the cultural field. Second, it has allowed us to see – at a later stage
– the differences in the way each layer of interaction is structured. We allude
to the cultural field because the non-institutionalisation of the film field
often implied that cultural activities related to film were organised alongside
other literary, artistic, and intellectual activities. Therefore, although the data
concerns the field of cinema, their relationship with the latter may often have
been indirect. For instance, when including the data from a film critique
(namely the author/s’ name/s), we also added the names of people involved
not only with the volume in which the critique was published, but also
with the journal in which the piece was published. In this sense, the use
of multi-layer network formalism allowed us to preserve information about
the relationships that women established through different channels, such as
publications, involvement in institutions, or participation in events.
Then, we performed k-core decomposition on all the layers separately, as well
as on the post-collapsation single layer. Our intuition was that, given the
nature of our data and our object of study, different interaction layers would
probably display different behaviours, as we saw in Figure 3. In addition, the
intensity of the marginalisation effect was amplified in the collapsed network,
though this was not the case when each layer was analysed individually. In
fact, this effect did not occur in certain layers (e.g., the COR network). When
performing k-core decomposition on separate layers (networks), we observed
that the marginalisation effect is stronger in the EV network. In this layer,
women fall into the outer k-shells more often than in the random network
counterpart. The strength of the marginalisation effect is stronger in the EV
layer because, by definition, the network corresponding to one event is a
complete graph or a clique (i.e., a graph where each node is connected to every
other node). The edge-swap stage adopted by our randomisation process
destroys such cliques, thus making the whole network’s k-core structure
shallower (Malvestio et al.). A similar reasoning applies to the PUB and CB
networks, albeit to a much smaller extent.
Another possible explanation for the marginalisation phenomenon concerns
the nature of the data. Despite our mitigation strategies, our data for public
activities like events, come from publicly available information (mostly

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

newspapers and magazines). The press releases advertising or reviewing events
(our information’s source) were less keen to include women in lists of
participants, thus making their appearance more marginal than men’s. Finally,
another explanation for the marginalisation effect has to do with the features
of people’s collaboration networks. As the majority of unacknowledged
women in our dataset come from associations’ lists of participants, they
form a sort of “private club,” inflating the amount of woman-to-woman
13
connections (Newman). However, such a correlation gets weaker in the
randomised network.
Despite the appeal and advantages of using a quantitative approach to
complement qualitative and historical insight, there are some caveats. For
instance, k-core decomposition assumes that the network under scrutiny
could be made of several components, but their structure should be complex
enough to ensure a moderate value of degeneracy. This means that the insight
provided by the k-core decomposition is directly proportional to the total
number of k-shells available. For example, the k-core decomposition of a
network comprised of a group of disjoint yet complete graphs (e.g., when
many events do not have any participant in common) yields nothing other
than the members of these graphs (i.e., the event’s participants) grouped
by size (i.e., number of attendants). This implies that nodes less entwined
with the “bulk” of the system will be relegated to the outer k-shells of the
network, even when frequently interacting with smaller groups. Working
with marginalised minorities – like women in the film field – which only
have scant bonds with the rest of the system, might decrease the amount of
information extractable via the k-core decomposition. Another shortcoming
stems from cliques’ resilience to the k-core’s iterative pruning process. Such
resistance makes nodes belonging to these cliques (events) fall into inner
k-shells, thus pushing nodes (people) belonging to larger cliques (i.e.,
attending events with many participants) into deeper k-shells, even though
these cliques do not share any, or no more than a few, nodes with each other.
Given these limitations, one possible workaround could be to cross-examine
the mesoscopic structure of the network and extract its community structure
(Lambiotte et al.) to study how the latter overlaps with the innermost k-shells
(Malvestio et al.). For instance, some of the events organised by the Lyceum
Club might translate into specific communities falling to the innermost
k-shells.
Despite the limitations of the methodology proposed in this manuscript, we
believe that our attempt is valuable to the study of minorities, like women,
and the social spaces they occupy. While our methodological proposal can
be used in a contemporary context, it has been developed specifically for

13 This phenomenon is called assortative mixing and has been observed in several types of networks, including social ones (see Verhoeven et al.

and references therein).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

the study of historical data concerning a minority group. In sum, we believe
that collaboration between specialists of different expertise and perspectives
harnesses a great potential that has yet to be discovered, which could
revolutionise the field of the humanities and pave the way for new and
exciting challenges in network science.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Vensislav Ikoff for his support in extracting
and curating the data, as well as Diana Roig-Sanz and Malte Hagener for their
suggestions.
The numerical analysis has been carried out using the NumPy and NetworkX
Python packages (van der Walt et al.; Hagberg et al.). Graphs have been
prepared using the Matplotlib Python package (Hunter).
Data repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/WULQ0I
Submitted: March 26, 2024 EDT, Accepted: May 21, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

works cited
Alonso Valero, Encarna. “Feminismo y vanguardia. La producción literaria obliterada de las mujeres
en la España de los años 20 y 30.” Pandora: revue d’etudes hispaniques, no. 5, 2005, pp. 163–69.
Alvarez Bravo, Lola. Lola Alvarez Bravo: In Her Own Light. Edited by Olivier Debroise and James
Oles, University of Arizona Center for Creative Photography, 1994.
Álvarez Bravo, Lola. Lola Álvarez Bravo. Recuento Fotográfico. Penélope, 1982.
Anselmo, Diana. A Queer Way of Feeling. Girl Fans and Personal Archives of Early Hollywood.
University of California Press, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1525/9780520971295.
Arendt, Hannah. The Human Condition. 1958. University of Chicago Press, 1998.
Artundo, Patricia, et al. Amigos del arte 1924-1942. Malba/Fundación E. Constantini, 2008.
Balló, Tània. Las sinsombrero. Sin ellas, la historia no está completa. Espasa, 2016.
Beard, Mary. Women & Power. A Manifesto. Profile Books, 2017.
Benedict, Nora. Global Networks of Culture. 2022, https://github.com/norabenedict/ocampodatabase.
Bianconi, Ginestra. Multilayer Networks Structure and Function. Oxford University Press, 2020.
Birrell, Rebecca. This Dark Country: Women Artists, Still Life and Intimacy in the Early Twentieth
Century. Bloomsbury Circus, 2021.
Borgatti, Stephen P., and Martin G. Everett. “Models of Core/Periphery Structures.” Social
Networks, vol. 21, no. 4, Oct. 2000, pp. 375–95, https://doi.org/10.1016/
s0378-8733(99)00019-2.
Bourdieu, Pierre. La distinction: critique sociale du jugement. Les Éditions de Minuit, 1979.
Brughmans, Tom. “Thinking through Networks: A Review of Formal Network Methods in
Archaeology.” Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory, vol. 20, no. 4, Apr. 2012, pp.
623–62, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-012-9133-8.
Cabré, María Ángeles. María Luz Morales, pionera del periodismo. La Vanguardia Ediciones, 2017.
Cardillo, Alessio, et al. “Emergence of Network Features from Multiplexity.” Scientific Reports, vol.
3, no. 1, 2013, p. 1344, https://doi.org/10.1038/srep01344.
Carmi, Shai, et al. “A Model of Internet Topology Using k-shell Decomposition.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 104, no. 27, July 2007, pp.
11150–54. National Academy of Sciences, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0701175104.
Clariana-Rodagut, Ainamar. Networks of Women in the First Ibero-American Film Clubs:
1923-1932. PhD Open University of Catalonia and Philips-Universität Marburg.
Clariana-Rodagut, Ainamar, and Diana Roig-Sanz. “Victoria Ocampo’s Transnational Networks: A
Sociocultural and Data-Driven Approach.” The Palgrave Handbook of Transnational Women’s
Writing in the Long Nineteenth Century, edited by Claire Emilie Martin and Clorinda Donato,
Palgrave MacMillan, 2024, pp. 765–80.
Codina Canet, María Adelina. “Documentación y archivo de La Residencia de Señoritas
(1915-1936).” Mujeres, educación y cultura. Centenario de la Residencia de Señoritas, Universidad
Carlos III de Madrid / Asociación estudiantil Carlos Marx, 2015, https://doi.org/10.5209/
rev_RGID.2015.v25.n2.51244.
Cueva Tazzer, Ma de Lourdes. “Filias y rupturas de una comunista: Las Memorias de Graciela
Amador en el PCM, 1924-1940.” Tesis Psicológica, vol. 12, no. 2, 2017, pp. 12–31.
Debroise, Olivier. Fuga mexicana. Un recorrido por la fotografía en México. Gustavo Gili S.L, 2005.
D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren F. Klein. Data Feminism. MIT Press, 2020.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

Federici, Silvia. Caliban and the Witch. Women, the Body and Primitive Accumulation.
Autonomedia, 2004.
Fosdick, Bailey K., et al. “Configuring Random Graph Models With Fixed Degree Sequences.”
SIAM Review, vol. 60, no. 2, Jan. 2018, pp. 315–55. Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics, https://doi.org/10.1137/16m1087175.
Fraiberger, Samuel P., et al. “Quantifying Reputation and Success in Art.” Science, vol. 362, no.
6416, 2018, pp. 825–29, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau7224.
Fuentes Rojas, Elizabeth. La Liga de Escritores y Artistas Revolucionarios: una producción artística
comprometida. 1995. Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México.
Fulcarà Torroella, Maria Dolors. La Residència d’Estudiants de Catalunya (1921-1939).
Publicacions i Edicions de la Universitat de Barcelona, 2011.
Fulminante, Francesca, et al. “Coordinated Decisions and Unbalanced Power. How Latin Cities
Shaped Their Terrestrial Transportation Network.” Frontiers in Digital Humanities, vol. 4, Feb.
2017, https://doi.org/10.3389/fdigh.2017.00004.
Gaines, Jane, et al. Women Film Pioneers Project. Columbia University Libraries.
González Naranjo, Rocío. “Actividades del Lyceum Club Femenino de Madrid censadas en la prensa
(1926-1936).” El día que supe que era feminista, 2018,
http://eldiaquesupequeerafeminista.blogspot.com/2019/02/habla-el-lyceum-club-demadrid-1926-1936.html.
Grosenick, Uta. Women Artists in the 20th and 21st Century. Taschen, 2001.
Hagberg, Aric A., et al. “Exploring Network Structure, Dynamics, and Function Using
NetworkX.” Proceedings of the 7th Python in Science Conference (SciPy2008), 2008, pp. 11–15,
http://conference.scipy.org/proceedings/scipy2008/paper_2.
Haraway, Donna. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the Privilege of
Partial Perspective.” Feminist Studies, vol. 14, no. 3, 1988, pp. 575–99, https://doi.org/10.2307/
3178066.
Hastie, Amelie. Cupboards of Curiosity. Duke University Press, 2007, https://doi.org/10.1515/
9780822388258.
Herrera-Guzmán, Yessica, et al. “Structural Gender Imbalances in Ballet Collaboration Networks.”
EPJ Data Sci., vol. 12, 2023, p. 53, https://doi.org/10.1140/epjds/s13688-023-00428-z.
Hunter, J. D. “Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environment.” Computing in Science and Engineering,
vol. 9, no. 3, Jan. 2007, pp. 90–95, https://doi.org/10.1109/mcse.2007.55.
“Inauguró sus actividades el Cine-club.” Radio Actualidad, no. 17, 1937, p. 16.
Jaccard, Paul. “Etude Comparative De La Distribution Florale Dans Une Portion Des Alpes Et Des
Jura.” Bulletin Société Vaudoise de Sciences Naturelles, vol. 37, 1901, pp. 547–79.
King, Kathryn R. “Of Needles and Pens and Women’s Work.” Tulsa Studies in Women’s Literature,
vol. 14, no. 1, 1995, pp. 77–93, https://doi.org/10.2307/464249.
Kitsak, Maksim, et al. “Identification of Influential Spreaders in Complex Networks.” Nature
Physics, vol. 6, no. 11, Aug. 2010, pp. 888–93, https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys1746.
Kong, Yi-Xiu, et al. “k-core: Theories and Applications.” Physics Reports, vol. 832, Nov. 2019, pp.
1–32. Elsevier BV, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2019.10.004.
Kowaleski-Wallace, Elizabeth. Encyclopedia of Feminist Literary Theory. Routledge, 2009,
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203874448.
Lambiotte, Renaud, et al. “From Networks to Optimal Higher-Order Models of Complex
Systems.” Nature Physics, vol. 15, no. 4, Mar. 2019, pp. 313–20, https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41567-019-0459-y.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

Latora, Vito, et al. Complex Networks: Principles, Methods and Applications. Cambridge UP, 2017,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316216002.
Latour, Bruno. Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network-Theory. Oxford
University Press, 2005, https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199256044.001.0001.
Leston, Eduardo Paz. Victoria Ocampo va al cine. Libraria, 2015.
Liendo, Victoria. “Victoria Ocampo: una esnob para el desierto argentino.” Cuadernos LIRICO, no.
16, 2017, https://doi.org/10.4000/lirico.3761.
Lizárraga Vizcarra, Isabel. Luz ajena. El enigma de María Lejárraga. Renacimiento, 2020.
Loist, Skadi, and Evgenia (Zhenya) Samoilova. “How to Capture the Festival Network: Reflections
on the Film Circulation Datasets.” NECSUS_European Journal of Media Studies, vol. no. 1, no.
2023, pp. 363–90, https://doi.org/10.25969/mediarep/19615.
Lutter, Mark. “Do Women Suffer from Network Closure? The Moderating Effect of Social Capital
on Gender Inequality in a Project-Based Labor Market, 1929 to 2010.” American Sociological
Review, vol. 80, no. 2, 2015, pp. 329–58, https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122414568788.
Macedo, Mariana, et al. “Differences in the Spatial Landscape of Urban Mobility: Gender and
Socioeconomic Perspectives.” PLOS ONE, vol. 17, no. 3, 2022, p. e0260874, https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0260874.
Maltby, Richard, et al. Explorations in New Cinema History: Approaches and Case Studies. WileyBlackwell, 2011, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781444396416.
Malvestio, Irene, et al. “Interplay Between k-core and Community Structure in Complex
Networks.” Scientific Reports, vol. 10, no. 1, Sept. 2020, p. 14702. Nature Portfolio,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-71426-8.
Molloy, Michael, and Bruce R. Reed. “A Critical Point for Random Graphs With a Given Degree
Sequence.” Random Structures and Algorithms, vol. 6, no. 2–3, Mar. 1995, pp. 161–80,
https://doi.org/10.1002/rsa.3240060204.
Morales, María Luz, and Ma. Ángeles Cabré. Alguien a quien conocí: Marie Curie, García Lorca,
Gabriela Mistral, Valéry, Víctor Català, Keyserling, Malraux. Editorial Renacimiento, 2019.
Morgan, Alison C., et al. “The Unequal Impact of Parenthood in Academia.” Science Advances, vol.
7, no. 9, 2021, p. eabd1996, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abd1996.
Morone, Flaviano, et al. “The k-core as a Predictor of Structural Collapse in Mutualistic
Ecosystems.” Nature Physics, vol. 15, no. 1, Oct. 2018, pp. 95–102. Nature Physics,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-018-0304-8.
Navitski, Rielle, and Nicolas Poppe. Cosmopolitan Film Cultures in Latin America 1896-1960.
Indiana University Press, 2017, https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt2005vd4.
Newman, M. E. J. “Assortative Mixing in Networks.” Physical Review Letters, vol. 89, no. 20, 2002,
p. 208701, https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.89.208701.
Ocampo, Victoria. Autobiografía. Sur, 1983.
---. Testimonios. Primera serie. Revista de Occidente, 1935.
---. Testimonios. Quinta serie (1950-1957). Sur, 1957.
---. Testimonios. Segunda serie. Editorial Sur, 1941.
---. Victoria Ocampo. Correspondencia. Editorial Sur, 1980.
Paz Garro, Helena. Memorias. Océano, 2019.
Pérez-Villanueva Tovar, Isabel. La Residencia de Estudiantes. Centro de Publicaciones, Ministerio de
Educación y Ciencia, 1990.
Poniatowska, Elena. Todo México. Tomo II. 1993.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Quantifying Women’s Marginalisation in Ibero-American Film Culture During the First Half of the Twentieth Century: A …

Real Mercadal, Neus. Dona i literatura a la Catalunya de preguerra. Publicacions de l’Abadia de
Montserrat, 2006.
Rodríguez Álvarez, Carlos Gabriel. Contemporáneos y el Cineclub Mexicano: Revistas y cine clubes; la
experiencia mexicana. 2002. Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM).
Roig-Sanz, Diana, and Reine Meylaerts. Literary Translation and Cultural Mediators in Peripheral
Cultures: Customs Officers or Smugglers? Palgrave Macmillan, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-78114-3.
Schich, Maximilian, et al. “A Network Framework of Cultural History.” Science, vol. 345, no. 6196,
2014, pp. 558–62, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1240064.
Seidman, Stephen B. “Network Structure and Minimum Degree.” Social Networks, vol. 5, no. 3,
Sept. 1983, pp. 269–87, https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-8733(83)90028-x.
Smith-Doerr, Laurel. “Flexible Organizations, Innovation and Gender Equality: Writing for the US
Film Industry, 1907–27.” Industry and Innovation, vol. 17, no. 1, 2010, pp. 5–22,
https://doi.org/10.1080/13662710903573810.
van der Walt, Stefan, et al. “The NumPy Array: A Structure for Efficient Numerical Computation.”
Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 13, no. 2, Mar. 2011, pp. 22–30, https://doi.org/
10.1109/mcse.2011.37.
Venturini, Tomaso, et al. “Actor-Network versus Network Analysis versus Digital Networks.”
DigitalSTS. A Field Guide for Science & Technology Studies, edited by Janet Vertesi and David
Ribes, 2019, pp. 510–23. Princeton University Press, https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvc77mp9.36.
Verhoeven, Deb, et al. “Controlling for Openness in the Male-Dominated Collaborative Networks
of the Global Film Industry.” PLOS ONE, vol. 15, no. 6, June 2020, p. e0234460. Public Library
of Science, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0234460.
Wapman, K. Hunter, et al. “Quantifying Hierarchy and Dynamics in US Faculty Hiring and
Retention.” Nature, vol. 610, 2022, pp. 120–27, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05222-x.
Zulueta, Carmen de, and Alicia Moreno. Ni convento ni college: La Residencia de Señoritas.
Publicaciones de la Residencia de Estudiantes, 1993.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

