Hagener, Malte, and Diana Roig-Sanz. “Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and
Interdisciplinarity.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 9, no. 4, July 2024,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.120944.

ARTICLE

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity
a

Malte Hagener1, Diana Roig-Sanz2

1 Institute for Media Studies and Marburg Center for Digital Culture and Infrastructure at the Philipps University of Marburg, 2 ICREA and Universitat Oberta de

Catalunya
Keywords: digital film studies, film historiography, digital humanities, data-driven analysis
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.120944

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 9, Issue 4, 2024

Digital methods were slow to make inroads into film studies and particularly
into film historiography. There are a number of reasons for this situation
of extended latency: as a multimodal object, film requires a complex
methodology for analysis which, in its translation into computational and
data-driven approaches, calls for an adequately multi-layered theoretical and
methodological framework. As a legal entity, film is heavily protected by
copyright which means that access is either not possible in lawful terms or
requires lengthy negotiations. As a digital object, film comes in the form of
large files that are not easy to handle and need considerable computing power.
Finally, the sources relevant to the cinema’s past were rather peripheral and
the necessary infrastructures for them were non-existent for the longest time.
Many of the sources have not been digitized and they are still not available
online. This is especially true for data related to historically underrepresented
agents in film history such as women and for data pertaining to film cultures
beyond the Global North. All these factors contributed to a situation in
which applying data-driven methods to cinema history as a method of
investigation became a difficult challenge.
Digital methods also require an investment of considerable resources:
personal, technical, and institutional. Using digital methods in order to
understand cultural phenomena, as it happens in other related disciplines,
requires training, funding, personnel, a large amount of time for obtaining
reliable results, and serious considerations in order to achieve long-term
durability of both results and data. Undoubtedly, the agenda of many
disciplines in the humanities were somewhat reluctant to these challenges.
And there is still no consensus regarding how digital humanities as a field
may fit with the particularities of specific communities in the humanities
(cinema history, but also digital translation history, digital anthropology, or
archaeology). Thus, we formulate a claim for a broader understanding which
allows us to see our similarities, but also our differences and how different we

a Diana Roig-Sanz acknowledges the support of the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s

Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme that allowed to organize the conference “Rethinking Film History
Through Global and Digital Approaches (Early 1020s – Early 1970s)” in the framework of the ERC project “Social
Network of the Past. Mapping Hispanic and Lusophone Modernity, 1898-1959” (Grant agreement No. 803860). Most
contributions here included were presented at this conference.

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

are when applying data-driven approaches. Indeed, what distinguishes most
digital approaches in the humanities and, more specifically, in digital film
historiography is that we rely on data that is not fully structured and/or it
1
does not fully exist yet and we need to produce it in the first place. Also,
there is still a lack of standards that allow us to work in a consistent and
coherent way as a community. Quantitative and data-driven approaches were
not at the core of film studies which has a tradition rooted in qualitative
analysis and film aesthetics.
Therefore, up until roughly ten years ago, forays into digital film
historiography were unsystematic, intermittent, and rather haphazard. As
humanities researchers, we still tend to think “small” in terms of what
we examine, but we have now the opportunity to think “big”. Yet, in
order to do that, we urgently need some theoretical and methodological
reflections, as well as empirical case studies that allow us to set the grounds
of digital historiographies and offer general standards for our community and
neighboring ones. Thus, beyond the question of data availability, there are
also other fundamental issues such as that of (self-)perception. A large part
of our community still does not have the sense of working with data in the
process of research and we need to raise awareness about the existence of
data - what data is and can be and if these data can be systematized and
processed. In this respect, this special issue argues that data exist in film
historiography and that these data can be examined computationally in a
productive manner. We also aim at discussing theoretical and methodological
challenges when applying digital methods to film historiography. On the one
hand, our special issue wants to shed light on the question of the value of the
digital in film historiography and the challenges we encounter when applying
digital humanities methods to film studies and film history more specifically.
On the other hand, we aim at discussing how to apply methods, protocols,
and standards that, up until some years ago, were more closely related to
the natural sciences than to the humanities, and this has certainly become a
challenge both in terms of epistemologies as in terms of their application.
Today, more and more projects and institutions make sources and data
available (which is a good thing), but often they are not sufficiently aware
of their potential to work collaboratively and the standards and norms that
have been established in the information science and library community. This
takes us directly to the question of data quality, but also to the important
issue of the lack of specific training in digital film historiography. The field
of digital humanities is fragmented, consisting of many small communities
which are not always well connected with larger infrastructural systems. To
give but one example: which sources, identifiers and data standards should
be used for a film as a singular work when cleaning and enriching data?

1 This is the case, when we have to model data from existing sources which is a process that arguably lies between digitization and creation.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

Should one refer to the Internet Movie-Database (IMDb) which started as
a grassroots project in the 1990s, but which is now owned by Amazon
and therefore shows limited transparency and responsibility regarding data
quality? Or should one link one’s data to national solutions such as the
“Gemeinsame Normdatei - GND” (integrated authority file), a wellestablished format in Germany which holds a high liability there, but which
might be practically unknown elsewhere? Or should one resort to an evolving
and bottom-up initiative such as Wikidata which is open to participation,
but which is also open to changes in governance and erratic data quality?
As long as there are no established norms and authority files that data
should adhere to (and this is the current situation in the field of film
historiography), one has to make hard decisions again and again because
sources are scattered and not always well-defined and structured. Between the
data producers, those who make the data available via specific infrastructures
and the users that need quality-assured data for working with digital tools
there remains, unfortunately, too often a gap that needs to be closed. Of
course, repositories with films as data or metadata exist in considerable
numbers on the internet such as the following institutions, initiatives and
databases: the “Moving Image Archive”, the “International Federation of
Film Archives”, the “European Film Gateway”, and “Colonial Film”, showing
2
images from daily life in the British colonies.
The elephant in the room here is, of course, so-called “artificial intelligence”
and how to make use of its widespread availability in the past two years.
We are now facing several discussions on how the use of AI will contribute
(or not) to the democratization of research and we still do not know to
what extent AI will be beneficial for digital film historiography or what new
challenges we will need to overcome. The use of deep learning models that
have become available for ordinary users in the past two years (for text:
Chat GPT, Bard; for still images: Dall-E, Stable Diffusion, Midjourney; for
moving images: Sora which is not yet available to ordinary consumers) and
the implementation of self-trained models into all kind of routines promises
new opportunities, yet it also throws into relief that the way these tools arrive
at their results is not transparent at all. If we use these methods (and both the
essays by Diecke/Paiva and by Oiva et al make innovative use of those), we
need to be wary of questions of replicability and transparency that used to
be hallmarks of scientific working for good reasons. Also, AI can be helpful
to get access to dark digital archives and to preserve content, but ethics and
copyright issues also come to the forefront and need to be considered.

2 Please see: https://archive.org/details/movies; https://www.fiafnet.org/pages/Training/Metadata-Management-in-Film-Archives.html;

https://www.europeanfilmgateway.eu/about_efg/contributing_archives; http://www.colonialfilm.org.uk/

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

Having sketched the situation that made working with data-driven and
digital methods in the field of film history difficult for the longest time,
we acknowledge that the field is in the process of rapid change. With the
massive digitisation of archives, magazines, and newspapers, important source
material has been made available online and is engendering new research
through large amounts of metadata and digital objects. This is most clearly
visible through the most important showcase, the Media History Digital
3
Library and other national and transnational infrastructural projects such
4
as media/rep/, which has focused so far on the accessibility of texts free
of copyright, but which is extending its portfolio into historical material.
However, it is also fair to acknowledge that digitisation of archives is only a
fraction of what digital film historiography should be. Indeed, as proposed
by Roth, there are three potential ways of understanding digital humanities
research: as “digitized humanities”, the creation, curation and use of digitized
datasets in human sciences and, to a lesser extent, social sciences", as
“numerical humanities, by putting the emphasis on mathematical abstraction
and the development of numerical and formal models”; and as “humanities
of the digital, by focusing on the study of computer-mediated interactions
and online communities”.
Within this general framework, attempts to institutionalize the field of digital
film historiography have been promoted and discussing methods and
epistemologies have become important goals for the activities of networks
5
such as HOMER (History of Moviegoing, Exhibition and Reception), the
Special Interest Group “Digital Humanities and Videographic Criticism”
6
of the North-American SCMS (Society for Cinema and Media Studies)
7
and the work group “Digital Methods” of NECS (Network for European
Cinema and Media Studies). These groups connect the growing number of
researchers interested in digital methods and their activities have supported
(trans)national film historiography endeavors of a digital nature such as
8
the “European Cinema Audiences Project” and the rich resource “Cinema
9
Context”. There is also a growing number of projects that aim at advancing
digital methods in general and also explicitly deal with questions of film
10
historiography such as the “Media Ecology Project” at Dartmouth College.
There is also an initiative such as the “Women Film Pioneers Project” at

3 https://mediahistoryproject.org/
4 https://mediarep.org/home
5 https://homernetwork.org/
6 https://www.cmstudies.org/page/groups_digital
7 https://digital-methods-necs-workgroup.github.io/
8 https://www.europeancinemaaudiences.org/research/
9 https://www.cinemacontext.nl/
10 https://mediaecology.dartmouth.edu/wp/

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

11

Columbia University that deals with the female presence in film production
during the silent period, and the two projects that initiated the current special
issue of the Journal of Cultural Analytics: the ERC project “Social Networks
of the Past. Mapping Hispanic and Lusophone Literary Modernity” at the
12
Global Literary Studies Research Lab of the Open University of Catalonia,
particularly focused on data-driven approaches applied to film criticism, film
clubs, and the history of women in cinema history, and the Digital CinemaHub network at the universities of Marburg, Mainz, and Frankfurt (funded
by the Volkswagen foundation) which set itself as its aim the implementation
13
of data-driven methods in film studies. A growing interest is also visible in
recent conferences such as “Rethinking Film History Through Global and
14
Digital Approaches” (Barcelona, October 2022) and “Doing Digital Film
15
History” (Marburg, November 2022). Likewise, as tools for image analysis
and object recognition are also becoming more readily available - the Distant
16
17
Viewing Toolkit and the Clariah Media Suite might be the most visible
examples to date - this might well be a turning point for rethinking the
methods, questions and results of film historiography in the digital era. Also,
there have been more efforts to make data openly available so that it can help
encourage further research and collaboration, but also to help storage and
preservation. These developments are also visible in terms of publications.
Many of them defined what constitutes digital humanities as a field (Terras
et al.) or as a set of methods and tools, but scholarship has also tried to
reflect about the sense of history in the digital age (Liu), about the potential
of computational methods for the study of culture (Manovich, Cultural
Analytics) or about the use of big, little and no data in our networked
world (Borgman). In film studies, about a decade ago, some publications
dealt with the editing patterns in relation to digitality in the work of Soviet
filmmaker Dziga Vertov (Manovich, Visualising Vertov; Heftberger), while
New Cinema History pioneered the combination of exhibition data with
geospatial information (Klenotic). In 2016, the Arclight Guidebook to Media
History and the Digital Humanities provided a much needed overview of
approaches and methods, underlining the development of the Media History
Digital Library. In 2021, Digital Humanities Quarterly published a focus
section on digital humanities and film studies, specifically on annotations and
the analysis of moving images. And the long awaited foray by Arnold and
Tilton into what they call Distant Viewing can surely be seen as a watershed

11 https://wfpp.columbia.edu/
12 http://globals.research.uoc.edu/erc/
13 https://www.uni-marburg.de/en/fb09/institutes/media-studies/research/research-projects/dici-hub
14 https://blogs.uoc.edu/in3/rethinking-film-history-global-digital-and-gender-perspectives/
15 https://www.uni-marburg.de/de/fb09/medienwissenschaft/aktuelles/termine/international-conference-doing-digital-film-history
16 https://github.com/distant-viewing/dvt
17 https://mediasuite.clariah.nl/

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

moment because it serves both as an introduction to the field, while also
demonstrating the validity and productivity of diverse methods. There are
more noteworthy publications, especially in the last five years and some are
forthcoming (Dang et al.).
Within this more general context, the purpose of this special issue is to
contribute to the discussion of digital film historiography and identify the
main fields of advancement for the discipline. Building on these advances,
the special issue aims at charting, on the one hand, what is at stake in
current debates on digital methods and film history and what are the most
challenging issues in the field. On the other hand, we are presenting cuttingedge research that demonstrates where crucial advances in the field are
happening and how the development is being advanced with specific case
studies. As stated above, we want to use this watershed moment by putting
together a number of articles that address some of the most crucial current
questions that emerge in relation to the digital transformation of film history.
Among them, we would like to underline the following ones: 1) theoretical
and methodological challenges when applying digital approaches and digital
methods to cinema history; 2) the creation of protocols and standards owing
to the lack of good infrastructures and sources prepared for the automatic
extraction of data and/or digital analysis; 3) the discussion about power
relations and underrepresented objects of research such as women, Black or
Indigenous people. 4) the ownership and control of data. 5) unavoidable
biases because of missing data or because of the fact that data has previously
been created by human beings and, in many archives, we may find several
mistakes and inconsistencies in the transition from analog to digital; 6) the
need of raising awareness about the fact of providing data that can be used
interdisciplinary and that can be reused and/or further developed by other
colleagues from our community or related ones. 7) specific training so that
younger generations of scholars do depend less on data scientists and data
visualizers. 8) time to consider and interpret preliminary results. 9) actions
for storage and preservation to fight against technological obsolescence. 10)
acknowledgement of the value of open data and data sharing by both our
funding institutions and our community, who are still a bit reluctant in terms
of sharing their data and a research process that might not be concluded.
To reflect all these themes either directly or indirectly, we have gathered
important case studies that demonstrate the potential of digital methods
for the future development of film and cinema historiography all over the
world. We want to address both the community of digital humanists, alerting
them to developments in film studies, as well as those interested in film
historiography who should be made aware of potentials and opportunities
in using digital methods. The general and more specific threads these case
studies will show are the following.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

Methods and scales
When surveying the articles that have been gathered, we come across a broad
range of (digital) methods that are being employed in the case studies. It
might indeed be that the diversity of approaches and the complexity of
workflow best illustrates the maturity that the field is reaching. In fact, most
articles do not just use one specific method, but often combine different
approaches. The studies collected in this special issue employ different ways
of scalable readings, or, to be more precise: text mining, topic modeling, data
processing and data visualization, GIS mapping, and network analysis for
the paper by Torres-Cacoullos and Senatorova, social network analysis in the
case of Clariana-Rodagut and Cardillo, but also for Hagener and Blaschke,
sentiment analysis for the paper by Diecke and Paiva, machine vision and
machine learning for Oiva et al, to name but the most prominent approaches.
Indeed, taken together the articles show that many of the methods used in the
wider field of digital humanities and cultural analytics have been incorporated
into film history in productive ways. It is also true to acknowledge the need
for interdisciplinary work in most cases, as our contributors come from
different fields ranging from media studies and cinema history to data science
and physics. In this respect, a question that comes to the fore forcefully,
if we look at the overall issue, is the relation between close and distant
reading: how do we apply mixed methods and in what relation do we put
the digital and the hermeneutical? How do we come from data to multisided, nuanced, and complex statements, but also: how do we find the data
necessary to answer the question that we are having? Interestingly, many of
the articles alternate between different scales, employing both a micro- und
a macro-perspective. There is a need for complex negotiations and scalable
readings. We do not see, for good reasons, the construction of one rigid
data model that is then used in just one way. Instead, there is a regular
alternation of different approaches, most visible perhaps in the complex
workflow of Josephine Diecke and Isadora Paiva or in the multi-sided analysis
of Oiva et al. In terms of methods, Diecke and Paiva have applied sentiment
analysis to film reviews. As the authors claim, “this is common in the field
of computer science, but it has been mostly absent in film studies”. The
emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs; ChatGPT was released to the
wider public in November 2022) “has shown that their capacity to handle
nuanced language could overcome some of the shortcomings of lexicon-based
sentiment analysis”. Oiva et al. apply multidimensional vector embeddings to
study the internal time of the films, and the external time of the years from
1945 to 1992. In short, the reader will find examples for the application of
machine learning methods for object and face recognition, as well as for shot
scale and editing.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

Topics, Sources and Tools
A similar broad range can be found when surveying the topics that are being
treated in the articles of this special issue. They range from the temporal
dimensions of film, as in the exploration of Soviet newsreels across several
decades (Oiva et al), the role of male fandom in silent era Spanish cinema, as
seen through contemporary fan journals (Torres-Cacoullos and Senatorova),
film exile and the vicissitudes of material traces and archives, as it is
manifested in a specific collection (Klages), the ebbs and flows of film
production in the German cinema from 1919 to 1939 investigated across
networks (Hagener and Blaschke), the role of film reviews in relation to
classical German cinema (Diecke and Paiva), and the marginalisation of
women in Ibero-American film clubs (Clariana-Rodagut and Cardillo). Some
of them explore the relationships between individual and collective histories,
and deal with historically marginalised subjects and topics such as film
reviews, film clubs, the role of women in film culture, and geographies, as in
the case of the Spanish-speaking world.
Similarly widespread are the sources used which shows that a broad range of
material is publicly available, but also that material can still be unearthed in
archives. Our case studies also show some of the challenges in the selection
of the right and most relevant sources, the issue of data-collection and
curation, as well as the efforts in cleaning and enriching the data with a
great variety of sources, often scattered and heterogeneous, not always wellstructured, or manually built. Hagener and Blaschke engage in the concept of
what a national cinema is and what are their most appropriate sources. The
discussion about sources also points to the multiple biases and inconsistencies
we have to deal with when our datasets are not complete, not available
or locked away. In this respect, the case studies are grounded in data and
material found on both primary and secondary sources belonging to personal,
local, national, and transnational physical and online archives: letters and
correspondence, historical periodicals, trade journals and fan magazines in
multiple languages, exhibition catalogs, photographs, online resources
through the MHDL and archive.org, Filmportal, the central internet platform
on German film, as well as data on people and films in the case of member
lists or lists of screenings.
We cannot delve into all the challenges our contributors were confronted
with regarding the quality of sources, but let us acknowledge a general issue
that has to do with the fact of working with a big volume of material
that was not digitized for large-scale analysis. In this respect, we would like
to stress the important limitations when it comes to work with historical
sources, unlike what occurs when researchers deal with born-digital material
or when they can easily scrape it, as in the case of IMDb reviews. For example,
Diecke and Paiva underline the difficulties of gathering the reviews for a
large number of Weimar films through web scraping, so that a corpus can
be created. In this respect, as Diecke and Paiva stress, this task is “far from
Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

trivial” and they have created a corpus manually, despite being focused on a
smaller sample of films. Also, film titles are “made up of common words, such
as “Metropolis”, “Passion” (the English title for Ernst Lubitsch’s Madame
Dubarry) or even letters, like “M”, which make it difficult to identify the
films without considerable manual work”. Even more challenging has been
“to distinguish reviews from ads (very positive) or plot summaries, […] or to
recognize when a review starts and ends in a text”. Obviously, the quality of
the Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is also a hurdle as it may both
affect “the quality of the digital text but also the reliability of the search
itself”.

Workflows and infrastructure
Torres-Cacoullos and Senatorova ultimately aim at "a systematic survey of
popular Spanish film magazines ". Yet again the many difficulties of processing
the data results in a self-restriction to just one magazine for the article
presented in this special issue. This is by no means meant as a criticism, but
it rather shows that the employment of digital methods in the field of film
historiography is still relatively early and much remains to be done, both in
terms of making source material available as well as regarding the application
of digital methods. The expectation of quick progress and low-hanging fruit
that just need to be picked is often misleading. Imme Klages takes a different
approach, as her starting point is less a concrete research question, but rather
an archival collection that is turned into a data set. As data needs to be
connected, the article traces the difficulties, but also the potentialities that
linked open data offer for film history. Digital methods are, therefore, not
only a tool to generate knowledge, but their epistemic potential can also be
found in their power to uncover seemingly lost connections. As the article
aims at unearthing the interrelations of film exiles, many of whom have been
delegated to the margins, using digital methods can also work towards a
redemption and a showcasing of the gaps left by history.
A similar path can be traced in the joint contribution by Ainamar ClarianaRodagut and Alessio Cardillo who start off from a well-known observation
- that women are being marginalised in the cultural domain just as in many
other fields -, but turn it on their head by proposing a specific digital
method for making this marginalisation visible. More specifically, they put
forward “a methodological proposal combining quantitative tools of social
network analysis with a feminist perspective in the field of historical cultural
phenomena”. By employing a novel way to ascertain centrality to a network
(k core decomposition), they are putting forward a methodological proposal,
but they also contextualise and critically reflect the productivity of this
approach. Here, as in other essays showcased in this special issue, the cultural
analysis done digitally needs careful framing, as well as specific domain
knowledge in order to do justice to the complexities and multi-layered nature
of cultural phenomena.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

The approach chosen by Malte Hagener and Theresa Blaschke investigates a
much larger data set - the national film production of Germany over a period
of twenty one years (1919-1939). As is often the case, preparing the data
is just as laborious as the analysis itself, but since the data analysis remains
exploratory and is not functionally directed towards just one factor, the steps
of finding and penetrating the data become an integral part of the analysis.
Moreover, the preparation of rich and qualitatively good data also allows for
asking other questions such as the centrality of specific crafts in the process
of film production. Here, the tendency towards linked open data (and the
general availability of data) becomes a driving force for expanding the range
of questions and methods.
Another question that remains to be answered is the role of aesthetics for
digital methods. Of the papers collected here, only Oiva et al use the films
themselves as data. All the other essays are concerned with metadata about
the films or with material surrounding the films, paratexts such as reviews
or fan material. It will be interesting to see how the field will develop in the
coming years, as more tools will be developed and become available that allow
for easier and more options at working with the visual and acoustic material
of the films themselves.

Concluding remarks
As stated above, the case studies included in this special issue clearly show
the marked tendency for interdisciplinary collaboration which is nothing new
to digital humanists, but which, so far, still remains the exception in film
historiography. Only one of the articles that we include in this special issue is
penned by a single author, all the others are the result of collaboration among
different and multiple fields ranging from media studies and film history to
computer science and physics. In this respect, the editors of this special issue
are fully committed to an interdisciplinarity that it’s not purely theoretical,
but that we can take into practice, and that it’s also well-acknowledged by
funding institutions. Certainly, there is always the challenge of establishing
collaborations with colleagues from other disciplines, working with a data
scientist that is in our team, or promoting more training for junior staff. And
we may also need to discuss if there already exists a sufficiently large number
of methods and tools that can be appropriated and used in researching film
history or if digital film historiography has its own specificities.
Without a doubt, film and media historians are becoming more familiar with
data-driven approaches and quantitative analyses to examine and visualize
with digital tools large corpora based on digitised archival sources that may
reveal significant patterns and clusters that were not visible before. As pointed
out at the beginning of this introduction, digital methods have the potential
of making marginal groups visible, as more data becomes available in different
parts of the world and through many initiatives. This is the case for data
in relation to women’s agency in film history, but also regarding minority
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

communities beyond the established centers and important nodes. Digital
film historiography is on the rise and it seems only a matter of time until more
research along these lines will be published and valued. Nevertheless, digital
scholarship regarding cinema history still needs more established protocols,
and a stronger institutional acknowledgement in the sense that many funding
entities and our own community does not acknowledge sufficiently the
value of the digital and the fact that some datasets are a scientific result in
themselves. In this respect, we need to raise awareness about the value of this
sort of research.
As editors of this special issue, we would like to stress that the editors
of this special are fully committed to the important task of decolonizing
cinema history and making more room available for those agents who were
partly or completely excluded from mainstream and several national film
historiographies. In this respect, we are committed to the FAIR and CARE
principles, the latter ones not being represented in this special issue but
implicitly acknowledged in our effort to promote a decolonial approach that
can also shed light into less underrepresented agents such as Indigenous
Peoples rights and interests.
This special issue has tried to expand the discussion about digital
historiographies, primarily in cinema history, but also in other disciplines
that work historically. We have also highlighted many of the challenges
involved in digital film historiography (the wide range of sources, often
scattered and non-structured, the investment of time in large-scale research,
the issue of digital infrastructures, as in the case of Hagener and Blaschke,
or the representation of forgotten actors in mainstream film history, as
in the case of Clariana and Cardillo). We have also stressed the need to
encourage multiple institutions, including film archives, libraries and public
and private collections, to open their data, so that our historical past can
be more accessible to society. Certainly, all these agencies are key actors that
can encourage openness (open science, open access, open source, open peer
review, but also open exchange, open borders), collaboration (mixed teams),
and data sharing, but they can also contribute to produce data and to help
granting more resources (financial, personnel, technical). Thus, we need to
encourage film institutions to create and structure data in a way that the
community can use them. That said, we will still need to push forward the
reflection related to ethics and the ownership of data or the discussion on
who creates knowledge in this specific field of research. But this will remain
for a future discussion.
Submitted: July 14, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Digital Film Historiography: Challenges of/and Interdisciplinarity

works cited
Acland, Charles R., and Eric Hoyt, editors. The Arclight Guidebook to Media History and the
Digital Humanities. Reframe, 2016, https://projectarclight.org/book/.
Arnold, Taylor, et al., editor. Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 15, no. 1, 2021.
Arnold, Taylor, and Lauren Tilton. Distant Viewing. Computational Exploration of Digital Images.
MIT Press, 2023, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/14046.001.0001.
Borgman, Christine I. Big Data, Little Data, No Data: Scholarship in the Networked World. MIT
Press, 2015, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9963.001.0001.
Dang, Sarah-Mai, et al., editors. Doing Digital Film History. Concepts, Tools, Practices. De Gruyter,
2025.
Heftberger, Adelheid. Digital Humanities and Film Studies. Visualising Dziga Vertov’s Work.
Springer, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02864-0.
Klenotic, Jeffrey. “Putting Cinema History on the Map – Using GIS to Explore the Spatiality of
Cinema.” New Explorations in Cinema History. Approaches and Case Studies, edited by Richard
Maltby et al., Blackwell, 2011, pp. 58–84, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781444396416.ch3.
Liu, Alan. Friending the Past. The Sense of History in the Digital Age. University of Chicago Press,
2018, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226452005.001.0001.
Loist, Skadi, and Evgenia (Zhenya) Samoilova. “How to Capture the Festival Network: Reflections
on the Film Circulation Datasets.” NECSUS European Journal of Media Studies, vol. 1, 2023, pp.
363–90, https://doi.org/10.25969/mediarep/19615.
Manovich, Lev. Cultural Analytics. MIT Press, 2020, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/
11214.001.0001.
---. Visualising Vertov. 2013, http://manovich.net/content/04-projects/078-visualizing-vertov/
74_article_2013_sm.pdf.
Roth, Camille. “Digital, Digitized, and Numerical Humanities.” Digital Scholarship in the
Humanities, vol. 34, no. 3, Sept. 2019, pp. 616–32, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqy057.
Terras, Melissa, et al. Defining Digital Humanities. A Reader. Ashgate, 2013, https://doi.org/
10.4324/9781315576251.
Verhoeven, Deb, et al. “Controlling for Openness in the Male-Dominated Collaborative Networks
of the Global Film Industry.” PLOS ONE, vol. 15, no. 6, e0234460, June 2020, https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0234460.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

