Windhager, Florian, and Eva Mayr. “Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From
a Lack of Theory to Its Visual Augmentation.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 7, no. 4,
Sept. 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.121866.

ARTICLE

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory
to its Visual Augmentation
Florian Windhager1 , Eva Mayr1
1 Universität für Weiterbildung Krems

Keywords: digital humanities, cognitive science, extended mind, technological tools, visualization-based DH tools, theory, visualization, distributed cognition
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.121866

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 7, Issue 4, 2022

Digital humanists have often been criticized as too technology-driven and for a
lack of theoretical work. In this paper, we discuss theories from Cognitive
Science on the extended mind, which provide a productive framework to
theorize the use of tools and technologies for the sake of cognitive selfenhancement. Viewed through this lens, humans continuously self-amplify their
natural cognitive resources and processes by extending and offloading them to
interactions with artifacts and other individuals in their environment. Concepts
of extended cognition further sharpen the focus on multiple types of
distribution: from the outlined internal-external distribution to the
propositional-visual distribution of cognition, but also for the multiinstrumental distribution across multiple types of tools and tool specialist. All
these aspects are relevant for future debates about a “theory gap” in the digital
humanities: DH mainly builds external, technological tools, while traditional
humanities develop conceptual tools—including theories—to enable and
enhance the study of complex cultural phenomena. Notwithstanding the value
of confrontational discussions, we argue for the benefits of understanding the
strengths and limitations of instruments on both sides—and for working
toward future synergies and ecologies of the humanities’ tools and minds. In
this regard, we show how visualization-based DH tools might might play a
major role in closing the comprehensibility gap of traditional theories in the arts
and humanities.

1. Prologue
Given the many flaming arrows that have been shot at work in the digital
humanities (DH)—from the charges of cryptotheology (Fish) to neoliberal
complicity (Allington et al.)—it’s tempting to feel at ease with the charges
of theoretical deficiency (Warwick). With this paper, we want to elaborate on
this stance and make the case for three larger points: i) The partial validity of
the ‘untheory’ charge for DH (sec. 1), ii) the defensive relevance of the theory
of distributed cognition (sec. 2-5), but also iii) for the potential emergence of
countercharges, arising from expected revisions of text-based theory concepts
by visual perspectives in DH (sec. 6-8).
First, we want to concur that we do not see the creation of theoretical texts at
the center of DH practices. Rather we understand them as complementary,
computational approaches to cultural data and topics by the development

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

and use of digital tools—and by the evaluation of their contributions to
humanities research (Gold; Piper). At first sight, this focus on a largely
supportive role to a largely interpretive and theoretical discourse field appears
as a feature: Given that a perceived lack of practical or technological relevance
is a prominent topos in the humanities’ worsening struggle for reproduction
(Plumb; Reitter and Wellmon), DH could be welcomed as a
counterbalancing force. Building up tool and technology expertise for more
‘transformative’ (Epstein) humanities departments, however, comes with
1
some costs, including a reduced engagement in existing theory wars. In
exchange, DH adds a stronger development focus to the traditional
humanities (TH) practice portfolio, and against this labor divisionbackground, the ‘untheory’ charges would rather confirm a subdivision’s
corrective course.
Sometimes, this shift also feels like a cyclical trend, as a field can arguably
suffer from both—shortage and oversupply. If the prolific decades of high
theory and critique in the 20th century soon morphed into rather
unproductive wars of discursive attrition—or even into poisonous, postfactual discourse derivates (Drolet and Williams; MacMullen, “What Is ‘PostFactual’ Politics?”)—a reassessment of the whole genre seems to be indicated
(Felski; Latour, “Why Has Critique Run out of Steam?”). Given all of its own
cryptotheological issues, even obituaries of the whole field have mustered a
certain plausibility (During; Felsch; Knapp and Michaels, “Against Theory”;
Knapp and Michaels, “Here Is a Wave Poem”).
It is our understanding though that digital humanists rarely subscribe to
such a general narrative of decline—but prefer a material and technological
remediation perspective: “Boiled down blithely, the theory is in the tool, and
we code tools” (Bianco 99). Working on such translations from elaborate
to computational code takes time, which has sometimes been condensed
into feisty slogans such as “more hack, less yack” (Nowviskie), or “mak(ing)
things, as opposed to talking or writing about them” (Warwick 539). Yet even
the founders of these distinctions are not known for taking an anti-theoretical
stance but to rather argue for mutually complementing efforts of ‘more hack
and yack’ (Bauer; Cecire; Nowviskie; Warwick).
Notwithstanding this widespread symbiotic stance, DH can draw on a whole
range of autonomous or affiliated theories, co-created in and around its labs.
As such, “nothing ‘needs to be theorized’ in a vague transitive way. […] DH is
an intensely interdisciplinary field that already juggles several different kinds
of theory, and actively reflects on the social significance of its endeavors”
(Underwood).

1 Arrows mostly aim for the resulting breach: “DH is barely worthy of the term scholarship because we do too much and think too little

(Fish). There is also a strong implication that our field does not take sufficient cognisance of theory—in effect, that we are not sufficiently
expert players in the game of theory wars—and that as a result ours is not a respectable discipline” (Warwick 540).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

In the following, we turn to one of these circulating theories—the theory
of the extended mind—which provides a luminous lens to reflect on
technology-driven times from an anthropological and socio-cognitive point
of view (Hayles). The seminal discourse in Cognitive Science has referred to
itself with varying emphases on embodied, embedded, extended or enactive
aspects of cognition, so due to pragmatic reasons we will refer to the whole
cluster as distributed cognition (DC). In their book on DC and the
humanities, Anderson (11) states that DC “casts a new light on issues that are
central to the humanities and enables us to better explain the nature of forms
of human culture and how and why they emerge and evolve” (11). Going
beyond TH, we think that distributed cognition has an even higher potential
to illuminate and theorize DH constellations due to its relevance for work in
human-computer interaction and for the corresponding assessment of digital
2
methods and artifacts.
We elaborate on this with an example from our research field, which is
visualization of cultural heritage data. Based on our expectations for this field,
we wrap up this paper with an outlook on a possible reversal of the theory
deficiency-charges, as visual methods in DH are paving the way for the arrival
of novel kinds of “theories”. More in line with the ancient visual practice
of “theoria”, these might more blithely tap into the potential of multimodal
and visual cognition, which arguably has been rashly neglected in logocentric,
theoretical times.

2. Theories of Distributed Cognition
Theories on the extended, situated mind provide a strong theoretical basis
and a scholarly rationale for a keen interest and investment into tool and
technology development—both from a cognitive and anthropological point
of view. Extending the traditional view of cognition as happening exclusively
in the human mind, theories of 4E cognition (i.e., embodied, embedded,
extended and enactive; Anderson et al.) consider the activities within nervous
systems of individual organisms to provide just one component of effective,
intelligent behavior, which essentially depends on the productive interplay
with further, external entities to form effectively cognizing and problemsolving hybrids. This basic idea of a material and social ecology of the mind
(Bateson) has many implications, a complex history, and it caused substantial
discussions in cognitive science (Norman, Things)—even though many of its
findings are eminently hard to argue with. To cope with the multiple facets
of distributed cognition, “philosophers and cognitive scientists who work in

2 More specifically, this theory helps to both substantiate and subvert the ‘theory deficiency’ charges against DH from a generalized

technology assessment perspective: While DH tools are no theories in the traditional sense, they can augment the complex processes of
investigation, interpretation, and theorization in manifold ways. TH theories, on the other hand, count among the core instruments to
augment the cognition of experts, but they come with their own costs and limitations. In the larger scheme of things, we consider the DC
paradigm to sharpen the view of tool users and builders for both the strengths and limitations of their instruments—and to encourage nonpartisan collaborations for the sake of synergetic and synoptic results (sec. 5-8).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Figure 1. According to DC, cognition should be analyzed as an extended activity (outer ellipse) distributed a) over
tools in the physical environment, b) socially, and c) over time via learning and cultural transmission.

this area often adopt what might appear to be a mix-and-match approach:
they accept some ‘distributed’ claims but reject others” (Anderson et al. 10),
so let’s dive into some of these claims and related debates.
While he built on prior work from other researchers, the origin of the term
distributed cognition is attributed to Edwin Hutchins (Cognition in the Wild;
Hutchins, “The DC Perspective”). Coming from cognitive anthropology,
Hutchins studied the navigation processes on a navy ship and observed that
its officers and their cognitive activities inescapably depended on continuous
social interaction and on the methodical use of navigational tools. Based
on these observations he argued that cognition ‘in the wild’ cannot be well
understood as computation of information in the individual human mind
(as emphasized by the ‘symbolic paradigm’), but as a systemic activity that is
fundamentally distributed a) across humans and their physical environment,
including tools, b) across multiple interacting persons, and c) across time—as
it constantly builds on and uses (cultural) artifacts, which resulted from prior
cognitive processes (see figure 1). Therefore, he claimed that the study of
cognition should not center its concepts on the realm of individual brains and
minds but should widen its focus to extended socio-technical systems, i.e., to
the crucial border-crossing interaction flows and cycles, and thus to hybrid
systems extending from individuals into their social, technical or material
environments. “Rather than assuming a boundary for the unit of analysis
a priori, distributed cognition follows Bateson’s advice and attempts to put
boundaries on its unit of analysis in ways that do not leave important things
unexplained or unexplainable” (Hutchins, “The DC Perspective” 376).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Hutchins’ concept of cognition as a distributed endeavor influenced many
other researchers. With their notion of an extended mind, Andy Clark and
David Chalmers proceeded to argue that humans and their environment
constitute a coupled system with two-way causal interaction. As such, they
attribute an active role to the environment which causes specific forms of
cognitive activities and argue that the mind are extended phenomena per se,
which cannot be reduced to individual mental activities. Clark (Supersizing
the Mind) further assumes that humans do not only use external tools to
extend cognitive processes, but also incorporate tools into their cognitive
activities. In his sense, important tools which are transmitted culturally, do
not only include material artifacts (such as compasses, clocks, or calendars),
but also the symbols, concepts, and expressions of human language (Clark,
“Language, Embodiment, and the Cognitive Niche”). Language not only
structures how we interact with others (in communication processes) and
with our material environment (via associated verbal concepts and the
language-basis of different kinds of media), but also how we structure and
manipulate concepts and conceptual networks in our thoughts during
activities of problem solving and self-reflection.
Akin to the idea of an extended mind, Lucy Suchman (Plans) argued that
cognition is essentially situated in our environments rather than our brain,
as intelligent action is constantly and dynamically adapted based on the
interactions with our physical and social world. Central to her work on
situated action are plans, which direct the interaction with the environment,
and which are frequently changed based on restrictions and options in the
environment.
Influenced by DC theories, Donald Norman took a closer look at the
technological side of distributed cognition and argued that both external
representations and tools (“cognitive artefacts”) can make us smart—or
not—depending on their match with our respective cognitive tasks and
processes. He coined the term affordance to describe that some tools are
well suited for or even trigger some cognitive tasks, but not others. Text
processing programs, for instance, either foster or hinder collaborative work
on a journal article by (not) enabling simultaneous writing and editing of
the text on the web, by offering comments and a suggestion mode, or by
providing awareness on others’ presence and activities. Each of these features
also triggers specific cognitive activities, like critique, reflection, or discussion,
which can fundamentally change the result of a writing process.
One central tenet of all theories related to distributed cognition is that
humans benefit from ‘offloading’ cognitive processes to the environment and
thus from unburdening their cognitive systems through their interaction
with both artifacts and other individuals. Sense-making (thinking, reasoning,
problem solving) does not happen in individuals alone, but by perceiving,
exchanging, and processing information collectively and by manipulating and

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

utilizing artifacts in hybrid assemblies of human-thing or human-technology
interaction. Yet, while theories of distributed cognition strengthen and
emphasize environmental, technological, social, and cultural factors, no
advocate of distributed cognition believes that the brain is somehow
unimportant. Rather, their proposal is that “to understand properly what the
brain does, we need to take proper account of the subtle, complex and often
surprising ways in which that venerable organ is enmeshed with, and often
depends on, non-neural bodily and environmental factors, in what is the cogeneration of thought and experience” (Anderson et al. 3).
While these ideas have developed and interconnected mainly in a cognitivescientific discourse, they resonate with conceptual and theoretical equivalents
in other disciplines and their discourses, especially in the fields of media
theory and science and technology studies, where various aspects of humans’
3
fundamental co-evolutionary dependency on technology and nootechnology
have been elaborated and analyzed (Latour, We Have Never Been Modern;
McLuhan). One main takeaway from these frameworks—and from this first
dive into DC concepts—would be that neither human cognition nor culture
can be meaningfully understood without taking the tools and networks into
account, which make them effective and evolutionary successful (Richerson
and Boyd). The results of human sense-making and cultural
activities—including the works of humanist scholarship—emerge from the
4
deeply entwined processes of cognitive, social, and technical co-creation.

3. Distributed Cognition in the Wild and throughout History
In his seminal book on “Cognition in the wild”, Hutchins distinguishes three
dimensions along which cognition extends into the environment and thus
operates distributedly: Its operations a) colonize and instrumentalize objects
and artifacts in material environments, b) it extends into the coordinating
minds of social composites, and c) it stretches out in concatenated, adaptive
processes over time.

3.1. Material distribution – Interaction with the Material
Environment
When DC speaks of the material environments in which cognition is situated,
it centrally refers to the mind-bending arsenal of materialized (traditional and
digital) tools and media infrastructures in our surroundings. The artificial,

3 We use the term nootechnology (from Greek “nous” mind, and “techné” art/craft/technique) as a shorthand for the sum total of cognitive

artifacts and technologies, that make humans smart (Norman, Things) in cycles of individual-technology-group interactions. Such collective
doing and learning cycles arguably also act as a main driver for cultural evolution (Henrich and McElreath).
4 Critical humanists of all stripes thus know to put artificially individualized concepts such as “author” and their “monographs” into

quotation marks (Fish; Fitzpatrick). Theorists of distributed cognition would further add that progress in humanist authorship and
scholarship essentially depends on the ongoing development of tools and would refer to both the conceptual ‘tools’ in humanists’ minds and
all the tools enabling and augmenting the information processing of the world.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

cultural and technological characteristics of individual environments thus
enable or hinder specific ways of cognition and (inter)action by the specific
design and availability of artifacts and technologies.
A very short history of the co-evolution of cognition and nootechnology (also
referred to as technogenesis in Hayles) can only be invoked with basic pointers
here (see also Anderson et al.): The evolution of homo sapiens correlates
directly with the creation and use of tools that amplify both physical strength
and cognitive skills. In the macrohistorical context, an elegant affordance
of distributed cognition is its invitation to look at both—the homo
symbolicus-line with its development of the ‘tools’ of human language,
5
abstract concepts, and also theories , and the homo faber-line that proceeds
from basic toolmaking in prehistoric periods to the advanced creation of
cognitive artifacts (i.e., from calendars and compasses to satellites, smart
phones, and search engines). Both lines coalesce and amplify each other to
enable the complex thinking, planning, realization, and organization activities
of modern times. In and around these lines, sign systems and media develop
as tools for temporal and spatial transmission: from cave paintings and
notches in sticks, to alphanumeric symbols, printed texts, and (interactive)
graphical representations (McLuhan). The evolution of media technology
picked up speed in the last century, especially with the advent of digital
technology. “Digital media and contemporary technogenesis constitute a
complex adaptive system, with the technologies constantly changing as well as
bringing about change in those whose lives are enmeshed with them” (Hayles
18).
Modern information technologies in particular appear as a game changer
across the board as they significantly extend the spectrum of distributed
cognitive processes: Computers provide new means to unburden human
minds from repetitive, tedious activities (like counting, remembering,
searching, calculating, or transmitting)—ideally to free the human mind for
its more ambitious, creative or entertaining strivings (Licklider; Grier). But
from a DC perspective, computers do not only free the human mind, but
further extend and empower it by enabling new kinds of cognitive processes.
From a functional perspective, humans and computers build unprecedented
hybrid ensembles: “Computers are incredibly fast, accurate and stupid;
humans are incredibly slow, inaccurate and brilliant; together they are
6
powerful beyond imagination”.

5 While the evolution of abstract concepts has been recently reframed as the first “cognitive revolution” and dated to 70.000 to 30.000 BCE
by Harari, the “scientific revolution” with its practice of theory creation is commonly dated to the 16th century and exemplified by

Copernicus theory on the movement of celestial bodies.
6 While it is frequently attributed to Einstein, the actual source of this quote is unknown (Shoemate). An attributable variant of the same

symbiotic notion is laid out by Hayles: “The more one works with digital technologies, the more one comes to appreciate the capacity of
networked and programmable machines to carry out sophisticated cognitive tasks, and the more the keyboard comes to seem an extension of
one’s thoughts rather than an external device on which one types” (3).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Figure 2. Spectrum of cognition or intelligence modalities, from unmediated (right) to amplified intelligence (IA,
center), to artificial intelligence (AI, left).

With the emergence of computational technology, a trifurcation of possible
couplings appears (figure 2), with implications for all kinds of societal
practices, including humanities scholarship: Obviously, cognition can operate
on internal means only and refrain from the use of external information
technology (right). Digitally distributed or mediated cognition then happens
in constellations where cycles of perception, cognition, and action include
computers and software tools as intelligence-amplifying artifacts (center). If
humans thirdly engineer systems that do not keep a human in the loop, the
realm of automated and artificial intelligence begins, where cognition is fully
‘externalized’ and where autonomous, computational systems act on behalf
of their algorithmic specifications (figure 2, left).
While the project of artificial or autonomous cognition continues to
accelerate (Jiang et al.), our further reflections will mainly revolve around the
distributed center scenario and related cycles of “intelligence amplification”.
Brooks refers to the overall computational constellation as “AI vs. IA”—and
contends that especially for addressing rather complex and ill-defined
problems, intelligence-amplifying systems with humans in the loop perform
better than pure AI systems. “That is, a machine and a mind can beat a
mind-imitating machine working by itself” (Brooks 64). Hayles (116) seconds
that AI methods and systems will continue to evolve and to become more
sophisticated, but humans in distributed systems can bring in characteristics
(e.g., curiosity, intuition or wisdom, see also Braga and Logan) which extend
the behavioral scope of AI systems and which allow them to (re)act with
increased behavioral variety in dynamic environments (Ashby).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

3.2. Social Distribution – Interaction with Social Others
In addition to its material extensions, the social distribution of cognitive
processes is the second pillar of Hutchins’ DC theory (“The DC
Perspective”). Early on, humans started to coordinate their labor in groups
and to allocate collective tasks based on the individual skills of their members.
This division of labor brings about cognitive specialists and experts, who
have the best knowledge and skills for the use of different tools. Groups
as organized cognition-and-action-systems know more and are better skilled
than their individual members—which is mirrored by different
conceptualizations of group cognition for cognitive processes located at the
social rather than the individual level (Akkerman et al.). On the macrosocial
level, the evolutionary success of distributedly cognizing and acting collectives
then directly leads to the division of labor, and the self-amplifying societal
megatrends of specialization, individualization, industrialization, and finally
globalization which sociologies of differentiation reflect upon (Rosa et al.;
Ziemann).
In the context of digital humanities research and practice, the social
dimension of distributed cognition theory seems to gain similar relevance
as the cognitive tool dimension. In comparison to traditional humanities
(TH) practice, where scholars are widely used to work individually, DH
work is known to essentially depend on social distribution and collaboration
(Fitzpatrick; Nyhan and Duke-Williams; Poole; Schnapp et al.). “Traditional
humanities scholarship rewards the solitary endeavor (such as the singleauthored monograph) and looks askance at collaboration (e.g., edited
volumes), but many digital humanities projects are often collaborative in
nature. This translates to an ethos of sharing and collegiality in these
environments, but the multi-author aspect of these digital projects may cause
problems during evaluation” (Koh). Like Koh or McCarty (“Collaborative
Research”), we deem it essential to balance the appreciation of the strengths
of socially distributed cognition in DH fields with a sharp awareness of
omnipresent challenges. We see such social cognition challenges in the need to
understand the potential users of DH tools (see sec. 4), in the need to create
better cognitive ecologies with traditional humanities scholars (see sec. 8), and
obviously in the daily need to collaborate with members of interdisciplinary
DH teams in sustainable projects (sec. 7, as well as Reed; Siemens). To
perform and to communicate effectively, socially distributed cognition is
known to require a certain amount of shared knowledge (common ground, cf.
Clark, Brennan, et al.), and the daily challenge to find this common ground
for language, terminology, methods, theories, tasks, workflows and values
makes DH teams the unique environment they are (Siemens).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

3.3. Temporal Distribution – Interaction of the Present with the
Past
Finally, cognition is also distributed over time by interacting in the present
with knowledge and culture from the past. The evolution of sapiens
collectives is strongly driven by building on the knowledge of our
ancestors—via oral transmission, via externalized knowledge representations
as artifacts (like machines or books as delineated earlier), or via culturally
transmitted social practices. Theories of distributed cognition emphasize the
importance of culture for the way we think (Norton) by focusing on the
cultural context and the cultural history inherent to artifacts and social
practices (Hutchins, Cognition in the Wild). This cognitive niche contains
“the incrementally, trans-generationally structured socio-cultural
environment that provides human organisms with epistemic resources for
the completion of cognitive tasks” (Fabry 350). Our cultural background
not only forms cognitive activities (like reading or calculating), but also our
social behavior and usage of tools. Take the use of digital technologies for
literature search as an example: Whereas digital natives have been enculturated
with an omnipresent access to the world wide web as a constantly available
information and literature resource, former generations were used to search
through card catalogues to find relevant resources, fetched books from the
library, and read through them to figure out whether they contain relevant
information. In line with countless TH initiatives dedicated to the creation,
preservation, and investigation of the contents from libraries, archives and
museums, many DH projects actually work on the development of tools to
further extend and facilitate temporally distributed cognition with regard to
different types of cultural heritage collections (sec. 5 and 7).
With these dimensions of analysis, DC provides a generative theoretical lens
to reflect on the interwoven dynamics of human cognition, culture, and
technology throughout history. On the one hand, it makes obvious that
a vast amount of human sense-making and problem-solving depends on
distributed architectures and socio-technical extensions. On the other hand,
as the next section details, it sharpens our awareness that the specific design,
quality and efficiency of our socio-technical extensions—together with their
goodness of fit—decide upon our overall performance in countless areas of
human activity, but especially in the fields of technology development and
technology-driven research.

4. Distributed Cognition & Human-Computer-Interaction
Since their initial conception as ‘thinking machines’ (Turing), computers
have been hypostasized as external, electronic brains (Carello et al.). From
a DC point of view, digital technologies rather appear as unprecedented
nootechnological options to extend and augment the mental activities of
human brains with ever more complex processes of computation that
depended on the cognition in other human brains before (cp. the human
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

roots of the concept of ‘computer’, Grier). However, such augmentations can
only be effective, when a frictionless coupling of human minds and cognitive
artifacts can be established. Consequently, DC often provides a theoretical
framework for the design and the evaluation of digital technologies in the
area of Human Computer Interaction (Hollan et al.; Suchman, HumanMachine). Digital approaches, for instance, can link and model historical
information structurally and relationally in knowledge graphs to extend
human mental models (Mayr and Windhager; Mayr et al., “Reasoning with
Knowledge Graph Visualizations”) and generate external graphical
representations for data on complex topics, with which an observer’s internal
representation can interact in different ways (Liu and Stasko). Proponents of
DC-based tool design focus on maximizing the fit between the external and
the internal representation, to make sure that tools and visualizations become
both useful and joyful extensions of their users’ perception-cognition-action
cycles.
In this context, multiple models for the user-centered design of (digital)
technology have been developed. Norman himself builds on the basic DC
assumption that people can act smart because they combine knowledge in
their minds with (materialized) knowledge in their environment (Things;
Norman, Everyday Things). How they use tools depends on affordances,
that is the relationships between the clues and qualities of a tool and the
expectations and abilities of an actor. Based on the perceived affordances,
users build up a conceptual model of how the tool works and plan their
distributed action. “For us to function in this social, technological world,
we need to develop internal models of what things mean, of how they
operate. […] If we are fortunate, thoughtful designers provide the clues
for us” (Norman, Everyday Things 16). Tool design directly influences the
perceived affordance and the conceptual model by using signifiers (hints on
appropriate use) and constraints (physical, cultural, semantic, and logical
hints on restrictions of use), by applying intuitive mapping strategies (natural
or culturally transmitted analogies, e.g., on reading direction, can be
immediately understood), and by feedback communicating the result of
a user’s action—immediately, unobtrusively, and informatively. To develop
good tools, Norman calls for “human-centered design” (HCD), an approach
that puts human needs, capabilities, and behavior first, and then develops and
implements designs which can accommodate those needs, capabilities, and
ways of behaving: “Good design starts with an understanding of psychology
and technology. Good design requires good communication, especially from
machine to person, indicating what actions are possible, what is happening,
and what is about to happen” (Everyday Things 8). User-centered design
starts with an observation phase for the assessment and specification of user
needs, followed by the iterative generation of design ideas, their development,
and testing (see figure 3).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Figure 3. User-centered design starts from an in-depth analysis of distributed cognitive systems to specify, develop and
evaluate cognitive artifacts iteratively.

In a similar fashion, Hollan et al. see the main difference between DC and
other HCI-approaches in a different perception of the technology—not as
an input to internal cognition, but rather as central part of the distributed
cognitive system. They “make a deep commitment to the importance of
observation of human activity ‘in the wild’ and analysis of distributions
of cognitive processes […] across members of social groups, coordination
between internal and external structure, and how products of earlier events
can transform the nature of later events” (193). To do so, they begin with
an ethnographic observation of the phenomena of interest, for which a
certain amount of domain knowledge is beneficial. This knowledge informs
the design and development of different technology variants, which are then
experimentally tested by users—again with observational methods focusing
on distributed cognitive processes. Such observations “in the wild” result
in deeper and richer data than the standard (often quick-and-dirty) HCI
methods, but also in a deeper understanding of the distributed cognitive
processes. Hutchins makes another claim for observational methods to
capture also unconscious cognitive processes, which constitute a large part of
human as well as distributed cognitive processes.
Distributed cognition-based, user-centered design aims to develop tools and
technologies which seamlessly and intuitively extend human perceptioncognition-action cycles. While many agree with Norman’s claims on the
design of things, why should we bother about time-consuming user-centered
design processes in a DH context? We consider in-depth observation of
established cognitive processes, immersion into domain culture and co-design
workflows with participation of domain experts to be a prerequisite for
tool acceptance in TH fields (Lamqaddam et al., “When the Tech Kids Are
Running Too Fast”). Particularly novices, who experience failure with badly

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

designed tools, easily generalize their lack of success and tend to reaffirm their
proven practices. To us, it seems relevant to avoid such reactions—especially
in fields where technological skepticism is quite common—but to aim for
technologies and designs with a maximized goodness of fit to established
7
cognition and action cycles. However, that UCD strategies do not have to
hamper (radical) innovation in technology development has been frequently
established (Lettl et al.; Radnejad et al.). As such, we consider the effective
mediation of innovation and design-driven approaches (Hinrichs et al.;
Verganti) and user-oriented strategies as the actual challenge for tool
development across the board.

5. Distributed Cognition and the Digital Humanities
Regarding the spectrum of internal, distributed and artificial cognition
(figure 2), digital humanities obviously focus on the development and study
of technologies of the latter type (i.e., AI and IA) for humanist purposes.
Due to large-scale digitization initiatives—from libraries and image archives
to music, film, and art collections—, countless cultural materials have moved
into the operating range of digital processing methods. From a distributed
cognition perspective, the related digital tools and methods extend
humanities practices on various levels in sweeping ways: Firstly, they
transform all kinds of support processes to humanities scholarship, such as
archiving and searching for sources, writing, publishing, and teaching, as well
as collaboration with students and peers (Hayles). Regarding image-oriented
humanities, Drucker summarizes the suddenness with which daily practices
have become transformed: “Almost overnight, it seems, the inventories (…)
have been digitized. We are suddenly able to avail ourselves of the great corpus
of art historical, architectural, archaeological, and other cultural artifacts
through a Google image search, snapping our PowerPoints into place in a
fraction of the time it took to make our slide-table lectures in the visual
resources rooms of an earlier era. Ease, convenience, and availability are signs
that an economy of plenty has replaced that of scarcity” (“Is There?” 7).
However, the omnipresence of new media practices across all humanities
departments does not imply that the core activities of humanities fields have
become digital.
8

Making use of a simplified conception of the TaDiRAH taxonomy (Borek
et al.; see figure 4, left) the outlined practices would appear as a preceding
and succeeding periphery of the central activities of humanist scholarship. As
such, DH technologies enable, augment and support humanist core activities
(marked with an asterisk in figure 4), including the multi-faceted practices

7 According to our best knowledge, DH teams and projects rarely utilize DC-based design approaches until now. Recently, we explored such

an approach for the development of visualizations in the cultural heritage realm (Mayr and Windhager; Mayr et al., Integrated Visualization
of Space and Time: A Distributed Cognition Perspective).
8 For a more detailed description see https://vocabs.dariah.eu/tadirah/.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Figure 4. Types of DH research practices (left), according to the TaDiRAH taxonomy (left) and schematic
juxtaposition of TH research practices (right) (Windhager 148).

of analyzing cultural materials and ultimately activities of interpretation,
including theoretization, contextualization, evaluation, and critique. Digital
humanists thus harness “digital toolkits in the service of the Humanities’
core methodological strengths: attention to complexity, medium specificity,
historical context, analytical depth, critique and interpretation” (Schnapp et
al. 2). To outline this hybrid research service design space, figure 4 also offers a
makeshift extension of the TaDiRAH taxonomy of DH practices (left) with
a provisional taxonomy of TH practices (right), to show how the activity
chains of current humanist inquiries (from research questions at the top to
the publication of results at the bottom) can draw from methods and tools
9
from both sides (Windhager 148).
In this context, it is our working hypothesis that DH processes rarely
substitute TH practices in a binary fashion, but they can a) support or
augment them to a certain degree, as they can b) impair or obfuscate existing
10
TH workflows and their epistemologies. They can c) do something new,
that has no equivalent in TH, and most often DH tools have d) combined,
transactional effects on humanist research chains, which requires a nuanced
understanding of the strengths and limitations of activities on both sides to
find convincing hybrid research solutions.
However, another widely shared working hypothesis is that the core processes
of humanist inquiry by and large remain located on the TH (i.e., right
hand) side. No doubt—computational methods are making steep inroads
on these core processes too, yet—until further notice—digital methods also
remain restricted to rather simple practices in these core areas, and to the
remediation of rather low hanging fruits of humanist scholarship (Windhager
and Mayr; Windhager et al., “Uncertainty”). It seems to be the same picture

9 While no established taxonomy of TH practices exists—and given the heterogeneity of TH domains and their diversified

methodologies—this figure can only be of heuristic nature, and act as an invitation for local TH/DH communities to collect and map their
practices in a more detailed fashion.
10 “When humanities scholars turn to digital media, they confront technologies that operate […] in significantly different cognitive modes, than

human understanding.” (Hayles 13)

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

for the whole range of humanities disciplines: For textual artifacts, it has been
stated that the “digital revolution, for all its wonders, has not penetrated the
core activity of literary studies, which, despite numerous revolutions of a
more epistemological nature, remains mostly concerned with the interpretive
analysis of written cultural artifacts” (Ramsay 2). For visual materials,
Drucker adds: “To date no research breakthrough has made the field of
art history feel its fundamental approaches, tenets of belief, or methods are
altered by digital work” (“Is There?” 5).
It seems that the core activities of humanist interpretation and sense-making
depend on (and remain tied back to) a different set of ‘tools’ that are rooted in
the complex ecologies of conceptual cognition and propositional reasoning,
including hermeneutical or theory-guided methods of interpretation. If we
follow DC authors and refer to these dynamic, conceptual networks also
as cognitive artifacts, they are structures which—until further notice—resist
approaches of direct technological remediation but remain located in the
realm of the “ultimate hermeneutic machine, the human mind” (Meister
269).
From a distributed cognition point of view, we consider these assessments
to provide interim reports of relevance: While DH tools and methods have
started to support and assist humanist research processes, they are far from
fully remediating, disrupting, or substituting non-digital tools and methods
chains. Rather, the need of the hour seems to be the development of a
nuanced understanding of traditional and digital tools, so as to foster circular
couplings, and symbiotic inter-tool relations. Until further notice, we are
working in and on circles: We build HCI ensembles, such as “scalable” or
“differential reading” (see sec. 8)—using DH tools to augment, support, and
amplify human(istic) core activities in the human mind (“IA > AI”, cp.
Brooks). This is particularly true for visualization technologies, which largely
subscribe to the paradigm of intelligence amplification or cognition support
(Card et al.; Arias-Hernandez), and which utilize the multimodal architecture
of distributed cognitive systems for that end.

6. On Visual and Multimodally Distributed Cognition
Our specific interest in DC is in multimodally distributed cognitive
operations and corresponding tools, which include the use of graphical
representations—and in visually remediating analytical activities that were
alphanumerical, verbal and largely hermeneutical before. For many DH tools,
the principles of “multimodality and interactivity are not cosmetic
enhancements but integral parts of their conceptualization” (Hayles 40).
Theories from learning psychology posit that large parts of human cognition
operate on a ‘bimodal’ cognitive architecture, which processes iconic (imagebased) and symbolic (text-based) content in different but interconnected
ways (Schnotz and Kürschner, see figure 5). Based on Paivio’s dual-coding
theory, they suggest that multimodal information is processed in parallel
Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Figure 5. Multimodal cognitive architecture, combining text-based and image-based modes of perception and
cognition. Adapted from Schnotz and Kürschner.

in (1) a verbal–propositional and (2) a visual–spatial system and leads to
the construction and elaboration of two types of internal representations:
visual mental models on the one side, and propositional representations
or conceptual networks on the other side, which can be transformed and
translated into each other by exchange processes of ‘model construction’ and
‘model inspection’.
While this model is not explicitly rooted in the DC discourse, we regard it
as largely compliant to its tenets and highly relevant as it adds the essential
dimension of the visual-propositional distribution of human cognition.
Complex phenomena can be processed either verbally or visually—or in
multimodal combinations—especially in times of “more media” (Manovich,
Visualizing Cultural Patterns in the Era of ‘More Media.’).
Another strength of this model of multimodal information processing is that
it allows for transmodal interaction and translations (diagonal and vertical
arrows). Thus, verbal information can be used to construct visual mental
models, or vice versa visual material can also be inspected and processed
semantically in a propositional way. Thereby, the visual processing layer,
which builds on the evolutionary older system of visual perception and its
capabilities of preattentive processing (Healey and Enns), can offer a more
natural and intuitive access to DH data collections, than text-based interfaces,
which require elaborate semantic processing or the acquisition of a more
technical (programming) language first.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Arguably, visualizations are one of the most prominent and visible
innovations, which found their way into the DH methods portfolio. “Visual
representations and interaction techniques take advantage of the human eye’s
broad bandwidth pathway into the mind to allow users to see, explore, and
understand large amounts of information at once. Information visualization
focused on the creation of approaches for conveying abstract information in
intuitive ways” (Thomas and Cook 30). We read them as one of the genuine
changes in the field of nootechnology, as they bring back the theoretical
castaways—our eyes and our visual-perceptual system—beyond their linear
symbol scanning duties of print-based scholarship (see sec. 8). Even though
diagrams have a long and venerable history, interactive visualizations are one
of the most fascinating tools to augment cognitive processes and practices
in face of modern-day complexities. Due to its focus on the augmentation
or amplification of cognition, the theory of distributed cognition provides
a strong foundation for visualization research (Arias-Hernandez; Liu and
Stasko; Windhager and Mayr). Visualizations can augment cognitive processes
in several ways, (a) as external storage of information, (b) by organizing
information, (c) by offloading cognition on perception, and (d) by offloading
cognition to (inter)action (Hegarty).
In the context of the (digital) humanities, manifold developments and
experiments have taken place in the field of visualization (Benito-Santos
and Therón Sánchez; Bradley et al.): Visualizations can support distant
reading of large visual corpora (Arnold and Tilton), of large text collections
(Alharbi and Laramee; Jänicke et al.), or of cultural collections (Glinka et
al.; Windhager et al., “Visualization of CH”). Further authors explored how
visualization impacts thinking in the (digital) humanities and in visualization
research (Bradley, El-Assady, et al.; Bradley et al.; Drucker, Visualization and
Interpretation; Hinrichs et al.; Kleymann; Lamqaddam et al., “Introducing
Layers of Meaning”).

7. Case Study: On Visualizing, Curating and Communicating In/
Tangible Cultural Heritage
From a distributed cognition perspective, the digital humanities project
InTaVia (https://intavia.eu) is situated on the rather complex end of cognitive
distributions (figure 6).
This project develops data infrastructure and tools for the visual analysis,
curation and communication of intangible and tangible cultural assets and
it follows a user-centered design approach to ensure that the intended tool
suite supports complex cognitive activities in a distributed large-scale setup (Mayr and Windhager; Mayr et al., “The Multiple Faces of Cultural
Heritage”). While still under development, the project design illustrates our
cognitively grounded approach to user-centered design with its focus on
distributed cognition (Hutchins, “The DC Perspective”) over the material
and technological environment, over social environments, and over time.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Figure 6. Distributed architecture of the InTaVia platform.

To begin at the back, with a focus on cognition that is distributed over time:
InTaVia is situated in the context of digital history and cultural heritage
technologies. One of its main objectives is the preservation and remediation
of historical knowledge on cultural actors and their works, i.e., to foster the
coupling of present-day cognition, reasoning and aesthetic appreciation with
cultural achievements of the past. For that matter, the project draws together
large stocks of European object collections and archives (e.g., as aggregated
by Wikidata or the Europeana platform) and knowledge about cultural
biographies and histories (e.g., as collected by the national biographical lexica
of Austria, Slovenia, Finland, and the Netherlands). By the means of three
user-facing modules, including (i) a data curation lab, (ii) a visual analytics
studio, and (iii) a visual storytelling suite, it fosters present-day activities of
cultural experts and practitioners to search for cultural information, to create
new information on the past, to compile and curate information, to visually
analyze it, and to communicate it to a wide range of audiences (Windhager
and Mayr; Windhager et al., “Visual Analysis”).
This is already a central aspect of social distribution and coupling of cognitive
processes we aim to address: InTaVia harmonizes and connects information
on the lives and works of historical figures (e.g. of painters, musicians, or
writers from the 19th century) with the cognitive systems of various cultural
heritage experts (e.g., historians and curators, but also teachers or tourist
guides), and allows them to communicate relevant data and topics to a wide
range of audiences by the means of new media formats, including web-based
visualizations and rich-media narrations (Kusnick et al.). These connection
and development activities themselves are pursued by an interdisciplinary
project team, involving traditional and digital humanities scholars, cognitive
scientists specialized in HCI and DC, as well as computer scientists
specialized in visualization, natural language processing, and AI—which
requires a fair amount of continuous knowledge transfer and ongoing
coordination. This interdisciplinary set-up and the guiding approach of user-

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

centered design helps to build a bridge between the expectations,
requirements and traditional practices of humanities scholars and innovative
11
technical developments.
As for the material and technological dimension of distributions, the project
aims to make tangible cultural objects available for cognitive systems that are
distributed all over Europe, together with biographical records scattered over
multiple national repositories. It does so by the means of data integration and
harmonization, but also by new approaches to DH interface development.
To access and work with the transnational data collection, three interface
modules (a data curation lab, a visual analytics studio, and a visual storytelling
suite) will structure the human-computer interaction of future users. Across
the board, visualizations will play a central role to support search, curation,
analysis and communication activities. While such visualizations most often
build on metadata to offer distant reading and viewing perspectives,
humanities experts also require means for close reading of the original
sources.
To enable both kinds of activities in a fluid, scalable fashion, the tool suite
will offer means to integrate and mediate both ways of analysis in an intuitive
manner. As such, the project builds on the user-centered creation of a
multi-perspective working environment, which will be able to also address
macro-analytical questions due to options of data aggregation, and to initiate
a multitude of circles of distant and close reading. We consider this
combinatory and scalable setup to also provide an outlook on future
constellations of synoptic, multimodal theorizing.

8. Towards New Kinds of Dheory?
We began this paper with reflecting on a vector of critique that attributes a
lack of theoretical activity to the digital humanities, due to their oversized
investment into tool development. The theory of distributed cognition, in
turn, guided us to reflect on the essential contribution of tool use for the
thinking and reasoning processes of homo sapiens in general, and to trace the
rich history of nootechnology up to the advent of digital tools—including
those developed in DH and visualization projects. Due to the growing
tendency of such projects to support the combined practices of algorithmic
analysis and hermeneutic close reading, we arrive at a novel distributed
cognition scenario that seems of the essence: a new kind of scholarly
cognition that is artfully distributed across traditional and digital means

11 Our approach of DC-based user-centered design aims to align complex technology designs with the established cognitive activities of future

users. For that matter, we invited scientists from the humanities and cultural heritage professions to a series of co-design workshops to better
understand their actual practices, to refine the user requirements and to gather feedback on the intended project architecture. In a next
iteration, we will ask cultural heritage experts to test early prototypes and observe their interaction to understand what kinds of distributed
cognitive activities the technologies afford. Overall, three cycles of test and refinement are planned to iteratively develop DH tools which
work in balance with their users’ cognition.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

of self-amplification. Arguably, when extrapolating from the last decades of
DH and TH developments, we also arrive at a point where a revision of
12
logocentric ‘theory’ concepts becomes plausible.
For that matter, we can build on one of the main arguments for the use
of digital methods—and against the carefree use of many TH
reflections—which is the argument of scale, and on a related standard
conception of DH+TH-coupling. The scale-based argument for the use
of digital methods is well established (Hayles 27–31; Piper): Traditional
methods of analyzing, interpreting, and theorizing cultural artifacts
(including methods of close reading or art-historical interpretation) limit
humanities scholars to the study of a humbling fraction of what human
culture has created—and keeps creating with accelerating pace. To counter
the panoply of biases that traditional strategies of complexity reduction (i.e.,
canonization) introduce to humanities scholarship, DH has argued that IA
and AI methods and tools—including visualizations—are valuable allies, even
though limitations of their interpretive powers are well known (Drucker,
Visualization and Interpretation; Jänicke et al.; Manovich, Cultural Analytics;
Moretti).
There is also a standard conception to combine the strengths—and
counterbalance the limitations—of digital, scale-based and traditional,
interpretive approaches by combining them sequentially and cyclically (see
figure 7): While digital methods are known to lack the analytical depth
of hermeneutic approaches to interpretation (Drucker, “Why”; Ramsay),
they allow for directing certain questions to vast numbers of objects. Thus,
computational and algorithmic approaches can help to “sort the information
and make patterns visible. Once the patterns can be discerned, the work of
interpretation can begin” (Hayles 33). Ensuing insights from the interpretive
detail level can then further enhance the understanding of the macroanalytical
patterns in large-scale data collections, and thus to move scholarly sensemaking forward in hybrid or circular patterns of “synergistic interaction”
13
(Hayles 31).
This circle has been mainly described for literary studies (Ramsay; Sinclair
and Rockwell; Weitin et al.), but is equally relevant for the study of visual
cultural materials (Arnold and Tilton; Windhager; Zaharieva et al.), where it
mediates digital distant viewing perspectives and the close-up views of arthistorical analysis: “(T)he main source of information in art history research
remains the artwork itself. For that reason, developed visualizations should

12 This line of reasoning is largely based on Windhager (2020).
13 In absence of a centralized discourse or terminology, this movement has been given multiple names, including the interplay of “immersion

and abstraction” (Dörk et al.), “rapid shuttling” (Kirschenbaum, according to Hayles 31), “screwmeneutic” or “hermenumerical” reasoning
(Van Zundert), “differential reading” (Sinclair and Rockwell), “scalable reading” (Weitin et al.; Fickers and Clavert), or the basic operation of
“algorithmic criticism” (Ramsay).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Figure 7. Suggested strengths, limitations and transactions of DH and TH practices (adapted from Windhager).

have a way to go back to the artwork representation” (Lamqaddam et al.,
“When the Tech Kids Are Running Too Fast” 3). The provision of
‘immersive’ movements into photographic detail views thus has become a
standard feature of advanced visualization tools, together with mental mappreserving transitions (Bludau et al.; Glinka et al.). We consider this circle to
be the current de facto standard for a quasi-ecumenical practice, reconnecting
TH and DH across their “great divide” (Pfisterer).
However, most of the visualization-based interfaces with distant viewing
functionality remain quite restricted regarding the actual viewing distance
or the richness of context, which they provide: Current standard designs of
distant views predominantly start from one given collection to draw up a
‘bigger picture’ (e.g., a histogram, a network graph, or a timeline, consisting
of individual objects) and to contextualize individual objects within.
Activities of traditional theorizing and contextualizing in the humanities,
though, are free in their choice of the scale, composition, and complexity of
context—and it might be one of the main challenges for future DH work to
also develop digital and visual representations for such contextual richness. To
do so, related efforts will have to connect existing data collections (e.g., object
and biography collections, as in the InTaVia project) and to mine relevant
knowledge collections for contextual data points thereafter. Arguably, this
will also include the foundational texts that revolve around cultural objects in
the fields of cultural history and theory.
Theories in the traditional humanities context are complex beasts: They
provide interpretive lenses, (onto)logical perspectives, and discursive frames
for studying and reflecting on cultural materials. On the one hand, they
instruct and guide close reading-practices and interpretations on the microlevel of scholarly activity, which cluster around relevant works, artists,
schools, or periods of production. On the other hand, they also create bigger
pictures with socio-historical, political, technological, and methodological
dimensions, which emerge and draw from local observations, while also

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Figure 8. A multi-layered and multi-circular operation space of digital-traditional theorizing and sense-making in the
cultural heritage data and topics domain (Windhager 154).
14

guiding and informing them. As larger interpretive and normative
frameworks, they also define and co-create the objects of study to begin with
(e.g., “images”, “texts”, “authors”, “artists”) and help to prioritize, canonize,
select, and reject objects—and to define criteria for which of their related
15
entities might deserve closer analytical or critical attention.
Figure 8 provides a sketch of how designers of future distant views in the
DH context (left hand side) could benefit substantially from formalizing and
utilizing these theoretical perspectives (right hand side).

14 Bigger pictures in the TH sense of the word are obviously made from words almost exclusively, and from rather abstract ones at that. A

rarely spelled out challenge of theories—at least in academic (con)texts—thus is the enormous cognitive effort needed to decode and
interpret their propositional complexity. In contrast to other media and modalities, text “is terribly cumbersome. It is dispersed, sequential
rather than simultaneous, poorly structured and extremely bulky” (Miles and Huberman 11). Big TH pictures thus tend to become ‘visible’
and comprehensible only for experts or readers with considerable amounts of time, dedication, and education, whereas they remain anemic,
hermetic, and largely inaccessible for everyone else.
15 The ways by which these essential frameworks are generated yet often remains precarious from a ‘scale’-based cultural analytics point of

view. Piper (5–7) summarizes related issues and derives countercharges from an inverted “theory gap” argument: TH theories rarely make
their genesis transparent or account for gaps in their knowledge creation procedures. Starting from selective studies of cultural materials,
they arrive on scholarly stages as “black boxes of charisma and insight”, yet also as constructs with generalized—and heavily
conflicting—claims of validity. Debates in TH and in cultural criticism then create agonistic scenarios, where proponents contest and
overturn the views of each other in a seemingly endless process without mediation. “As a cultural critic, one feels like the child of parents
who argue incessantly out of a sense of sport or even boredom, all in the name of a higher principle.” (7) By contrast, the model of
knowledge creation in DH and in cultural analytics—from data selection to exploration and from hypothesis-creation to testing, but also
regarding processes of tool creation—tends to be more transparent, explicit, and consensus-driven. Others can share in the steps, correct
those steps, and challenge them, or build on them and refine them because those steps have been made more legible. As such, the study of
culture becomes “more architectonic rather than agonistic, more social and collective.” (Piper 7)

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

With the InTaVia project, we aim to do what Giorgio Vasari (The Lives
of the Artists) established centuries ago: to study the biographies of artists
in joint with the works and artifacts they created—and vice versa (figure
8, first and second level from bottom). However, if scholars—due to their
theoretical preferences—prefer to study and situate cultural objects in the
larger stylistic formations of an ‘art history without names’ (a term coined
by Wölfflin in 1915), linked data architectures should allow for a shift to
the bigger pictures and ‘shapes of time’ (Salisu et al.) that result from
taxonomic distinctions (figure 8, third level from bottom). If, by contrast,
the reflection on larger external (i.e., socio-economic, political, technological,
colonialist, racial, historical) realities is seen as a theoretical key to guide and
complement an object’s close-up study, distant views should be able to also
represent materialist, critical, postcolonial, or gender-theoretical perspectives
and structures, and bring corresponding historical formations into the timeoriented perspectives of macro-level contextualizations (Mayr and Windhager
242, figure 8, top level). Figure 8 draws these layers of contextual magnitude
together and outlines with vertical and horizontal movements, what an
advanced design space of computational-hermeneutic reasoning could look
like.
Data-based visualization systems organize and represent data and topics
differently than traditional, language-based texts and theories. They could be
argued to operate in an orthogonal fashion to established means of qualitative
information processing, and their views can augment and contrast established
interpretive perspectives. To that end, “complementarity is key” (Bonfiglioli
and Nanni)—and aside from mediating well-established information (most
notably for pedagogic purposes), the relevance of visualizations lies in their
potential to offer unprecedented macroscopic perspectives, which grant instant
perceptual access to “what is at once too great, to slow, and too complex
16
for our eyes” to see (Rosnay 4). Advanced datafication and visualization
approaches to cultural materials thus enable new investigation,
contemplation, and communication practices, without simply replacing nondigital practices that have dominated the methods portfolio before. They
bring about new ways for scholars to observe and perceive cultural
complexity—and they tap into different cognitive faculties than the
propositional meaning structures of academic prose (Tversky, “Visualizing
Thought”).
With this, visualizations re-elevate the role of the scholarly senses of sight and
promote them from line-oriented symbol scanning tasks to the more natural
callings of wideband vision, visual exploration, pattern recognition, and sensemaking. To augment the (in)sights and counterbalance the cognitive

16 Metaphorical suggestions to refer to such nootechnologies include “telescopes of the mind” (Masterman; McCarty, “A Telescope”), as well as

“macroscopes” (Rosnay; Börner; Stefaner), which both draw analogies to established scientific observation technologies, whose optical
apparatus brought formerly hidden data dimensions into a perceptually and cognitively accessible format.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

challenges, which are known to emerge from reading and logocentric
reasoning, visualizations bring the highly evolved faculties of visual
perception and sense-making (back) into play, so that a complementary
system of image-oriented perception-cognition can join the language-oriented
sense-making system of propositional processing (Schnotz and Kürschner).
The resulting mental structures—whether as cognitive collages or mental
models—are known to interweave aspects of both visual-spatial information
and propositional information of language-based, theoretical thought in a
17
multimodal fashion.
Ironically, the concept of “theory”—whose alleged absence is admonished
in DH contexts—has a deep cultural history, which goes back to the act
of “seeing” (Nightingale). Before theory was defined to be the post- or
non-empirical contemplation of ideas by the “blind” eye of philosophical
18
reason , the term signified the practice of viewing and interpreting sacred
rites, objects, and images (theôria as seeing, beholding, gazing, and viewing)
in the Greek theatron, literally a “place for seeing” (Sennet 124). Before Plato
cast doubt on the shadowy images of sensory perception—and called for
their transcendence by the light of discursive-dialectical reasoning—the senses
of sight had a major say in the theophanic perception and interpretation
of the world (Sloterdijk 6). Against this background, we feel tempted to
argue that the academic arc of logocentric and iconoclastic history is long
but eventually bends back to multimodal justice. The late-modern rise of
“Visualizationism” (Staley) as a wellspring for new kinds of epistemological
images thus could be read as the late renaissance of a pre-traditional, provisual practice and interpretation of theory. We might even consider calling it
“dheory”, to emphasize its significant scholarly potential with a straining but
salient term.
“Dheory” in the realm of the arts and humanities then might serve as
an aspirational term and a regulative idea, whose evocation might fall by
the post-digital wayside, like a second installment of Wittgenstein’s ladder.
Nevertheless, dheory—as a novel practice, and as indicated by its initial
letters—would build on the recent achievements of digitization in the
humanities, but it would emerge only from multiple further procedures of
distributed, multimodal information processing.

17 Addressing the essential dual role of visualizations as models on our screens and in our minds, Tversky summarizes: “Models are necessary for

thinking; by omitting, adding, and distorting the information they represent they can recraft the information into a multitude of forms that
the mind can work with to understand extant ideas and create new ones. Models take elements and relations among them in the represented
world and map them onto elements and relations in the representing world. In the case of tangible, diagrammatic, and gestural models, the
elements and relations are spatial. The fundamental elements are dots and lines, nodes and links. A dot can represent any concept from a
place in a route to an idea in a web of concepts. Lines represent relations, any relation, between dots. As such, spatial models rely on more
direct and accessible mappings than language, which bears only arbitrary relations to meaning. These mappings can be put into the world
and made visible or visceral in graphics and gesture.” (“Multiple Models” 63)
18 “The philosopher must accept the condition of blindness as the precondition for philosophic insight. He goes blind in order that he may

see.” (Nightingale 104)

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

9. Outlook
As a theoretical framework, distributed cognition can inform and guide the
design, development, and evaluation of DH technologies, but also provide
a valuable theoretical lens to reflect on the strengths and limitations of
humanities practice in general, and on future work at the essential
intersection of digital and non-digital scholarship. Its central concepts reach
far below the thin historical layers of digital times and help to trace and
understand how human sense-making and reasoning always depends on the
art of artificial and socio-technical co-creation. Simultaneously, it directs our
focus back to the cognitive processes at the very core of many DH projects
and to the question how digital technologies can assist to distribute them
across material environments (i.e., towards things and topics via tools), but
also to the social environment (e.g., via computer-supported collaborative
scenarios), and over time—allowing us to newly befriend the past (Liu).
Regarding the recurring critique of DH’s theoretical deficiency, we elaborated
on one of the most interesting implications of distributed cognition: When
focusing on the fact that cognition also works in a distributed fashion across
a multimodal architecture (figure 5), it becomes obvious that traditional
theories are largely built as one-sided (i.e., monomodal and text-based)
instruments. Inspired by premodern “theory” conceptions more closely
attuned to the visual workings of extended minds, we thus developed an
epistemic narrative (Kleymann et al.) which reverses the theoretical deficiency
charges and simultaneously shows how to compensate them for the TH side.
Due to their strengths in processing and visualizing language data, DH play a
key role in making text-based information architectures visually accessible and
in closing related “comprehensibility gaps” (see footnote 14). We thus see a
key role for DH to augment and enhance the future reception and mediation
of traditional theories and their claims with visualization-based perspectives.
As a widely distributed, evolving species, we make use of multiple types and
generations of tools to reflect on ourselves. While binary and confrontational
conceptions of the current tool titanomachy (the old deities of toolmaking
vs. the new ones) provide a certain discourse and entertainment value, a
distributed cognition perspective makes plausible that the future of both
lineages inevitably depends on hybrid epistemological joint ventures, to break
new ground in the synoptic analysis and interpretation of evolving cultural
complexity.

Acknowledgments
This work has received funding from the European Union H2020 research
and innovation program under grant agreement No. 101004825. We want to
thank Hanna Risku for many years of theoretical dialog.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Submitted: April 15, 2024 EDT, Accepted: May 13, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

works cited
Akkerman, Sanne, et al. “Reconsidering Group Cognition: From Conceptual Confusion to a
Boundary Area Between Cognitive and Socio-Cultural Perspectives?” Educational Research
Review, vol. 2, no. 1, 2007, pp. 39–63, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2007.02.001.
Alharbi, Mohammad, and Robert S. Laramee. “SoS TextVis: An Extended Survey of Surveys on
Text Visualization.” Computers, vol. 8, no. 17, 2019, pp. 1–18, https://doi.org/10.3390/
computers8010017.
Allington, Daniel, et al. “Neoliberal Tools (and Archives): A Political History of Digital
Humanities.” Los Angeles Review of Books, May 2016, https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/
neoliberal-tools-archives-political-history-digital-humanities/.
Anderson, Miranda, et al. “Distributed Cognition and the Humanities.” Distributed Cognition in
Classical Antiquity, edited by Miranda Anderson et al., 2019, pp. 1–17. Edinburgh University
Press, https://doi.org/10.1353/sub.2022.0018.
Arias-Hernandez, Richard, et al. “From Cognitive Amplifiers to Cognitive Prostheses:
Understandings of the Material Basis of Cognition in Visual Analytics.” Interdisciplinary Science
Reviews, vol. 37, no. 1, 2012, pp. 4–18, https://doi.org/10.1179/0308018812Z.0000000001.
Arnold, Taylor, and Lauren Tilton. “Distant Viewing: Analyzing Large Visual Corpora.” Digital
Scholarship in the Humanities, vol. 34, Supplement 1, 2019, pp. i3–16, https://doi.org/10.1093/
llc/fqz013.
Ashby, William, R. An Introduction to Cybernetics. Wiley, 1956, https://doi.org/10.5962/
bhl.title.5851.
Bateson, Gregory. Steps to an Ecology of Mind. Ballantine Books, 1972.
Bauer, Jean. “Who You Calling Untheoretical?” Journal of Digital Humanities, vol. 1, no. 1, 2011,
pp. 68–74.
Benito-Santos, Alejandro, and Roberto Therón Sánchez. “A Data-Driven Introduction to Authors,
Readings, and Techniques in Visualization for the Digital Humanities.” IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, vol. 40, no. 3, 2020, pp. 45–57, https://doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2020.2973945.
Bianco, Jamie. “This Digital Humanities Which Is Not One.” Debates in the Digital Humanities
2012, edited by Matthew K. Gold, University of Minnesota Press, 2012, pp. 96–112,
https://doi.org/10.5749/j.ctttv8hq.10.
Bludau, Mark-Jan, et al. “Reading Traces: Scalable Exploration in Elastic Visualizations of Cultural
Heritage Data.” Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 39, no. 3, 2020, pp. 77–87, https://doi.org/
10.1111/cgf.13964.
Bonfiglioli, Rudi, and Federico Nanni. “From Close to Distant and Back: How to Read with the
Help of Machines.” History and Philosophy of Computing: Third International Conference, Pisa
2015, Revised Selected Papers 3, Springer, 2016, pp. 87–100, https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-47286-7_6.
Borek, Luise, et al. “TaDiRAH: A Case Study in Pragmatic Classification.” Digital Humanities
Quarterly, vol. 10, no. 1, 2016.
Börner, Katy. “Plug-and-Play Macroscopes.” Communications of the ACM, vol. 54, no. 3, 2011, pp.
60–69, https://doi.org/10.1145/1897852.1897871.
Bradley, Adam James, Mennatallah El-Assady, et al. “Visualization and the Digital Humanities.”
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 38, no. 6, 2018, pp. 26–38, https://doi.org/
10.1109/MCG.2018.2878900.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Bradley, Adam James, et al. “Visualization, Digital Humanities, and the Problem of
Instrumentalism.” 1st Workshop on Visualization for the Digital Humanities (Vis4DH), 2016,
https://vis4dh.dbvis.de/2016/.
Braga, Adriana, and Robert K. Logan. “The Emperor of Strong AI Has No Clothes: Limits to
Artificial Intelligence.” Information, vol. 8, no. 4, 2017, p. 156, https://doi.org/10.3390/
info8040156.
Brooks, Frederick P., Jr. “The Computer Scientist as Toolsmith II.” Communications of the ACM,
vol. 39, no. 3, 1996, pp. 61–68, https://doi.org/10.1145/227234.227243.
Card, Stuart K., et al., editors. Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think.
Morgan Kaufmann.
Carello, Claudia, et al. “Inadequacies of the Computer Metaphor.” Handbook of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 1984, pp. 229–48, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-2177-2_12.
Cecire, Natalia. “When Digital Humanities Was in Vogue.” Journal of Digital Humanities, vol. 1,
no. 1, 2011, https://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/when-digital-humanities-was-in-vogue-bynatalia-cecire/.
Clark, Andy. “Language, Embodiment, and the Cognitive Niche.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol.
10, no. 8, 2006, pp. 370–74, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.06.012.
---. Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Action, and Cognitive Extension. OUP USA, 2008,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195333213.001.0001.
Clark, Andy, and David Chalmers. “The Extended Mind.” Analysis, vol. 58, no. 1, 1998, pp. 7–19,
https://doi.org/10.1093/analys/58.1.7.
Clark, Herbert H., Susan E. Brennan, et al. “Grounding in Communication.” Perspectives on
Socially Shared Cognition, edited by Lauren B. Resnick et al., American Psychological
Association, 1991, pp. 127–49, https://doi.org/10.1037/10096-006.
Dedehayir, Ozgur, and Martin Steinert. “The Hype Cycle Model: A Review and Future
Directions.” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 108, 2016, pp. 28–41,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.04.005.
D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren F. Klein. Data Feminism. MIT Press, 2020, https://doi.org/
10.7551/mitpress/11805.001.0001.
Dörk, Marian, et al. “The Information Flaneur: A Fresh Look at Information Seeking.” Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2011, pp. 1215–24,
https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979124.
Drolet, Jean-Francois, and Michael C. Williams. “From Critique to Reaction: The New Right,
Critical Theory and International Relations.” Journal of International Political Theory, vol. 18,
no. 1, 2022, pp. 23–45, https://doi.org/10.1177/17550882211020409.
Drucker, Johanna. “Humanistic Theory and Digital Scholarship.” Debates in the Digital
Humanities 2012, edited by Matthew K. Gold, 2012, pp. 85–95, https://doi.org/10.5749/
minnesota/9780816677948.003.0011.
---. “Is There a ‘Digital’ Art History?” Visual Resources, vol. 29, no. 1–2, 2013, pp. 5–13,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01973762.2013.761106.
---. Visualization and Interpretation: Humanistic Approaches to Display. MIT Press, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12523.001.0001.
---. “Why Distant Reading Isn’t.” PMLA, vol. 132, no. 3, 2017, pp. 628–35, https://doi.org/
10.1632/pmla.2017.132.3.628.
During, Simon. “Losing Faith in the Humanities.” The Chronicle of Higher Education, vol. 18,
2019.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Epstein, Mikhail. The Transformative Humanities: A Manifesto. Bloomsbury Publishing USA,
2012, https://doi.org/10.5040/9781472542885.
Fabry, Regina E. “Explaining Enculturated Cognition.” Proceedings of the 39th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci), 2017, pp. 349–54.
Felsch, Philipp. The Summer of Theory: History of a Rebellion, 1960-1990. John Wiley & Sons,
2021.
Felski, Rita. The Limits of Critique. University of Chicago Press, 2015, https://doi.org/10.7208/
chicago/9780226294179.001.0001.
Fickers, Andreas, and Frédéric Clavert. “On Pyramids, Prisms, and Scalable Reading.” Journal of
Digital History, vol. 1, no. 1, 2021, pp. 1–13, https://doi.org/10.1515/jdh-2021-1008.
Fish, Stanley. “The Digital Humanities and the Transcending of Mortality.” The New York Times, 9
Jan. 2012, http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/01/09/the-digital-humanities-and-thetranscending-of-mortality/.
Fitzpatrick, Kathleen. Planned Obsolescence: Publishing, Technology, and the Future of the Academy.
NYU Press, 2011, https://doi.org/10.18574/nyu/9780814728970.001.0001.
Glinka, Katrin, et al. “Past Visions and Reconciling Views: Visualizing Time, Texture and Themes
in Cultural Collections.” DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly, no. 2, 2017, https://
www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/11/2/000290/000290.html.
Gold, Matthew K. Debates in the Digital Humanities. U of Minnesota Press, 2012, https://doi.org/
10.5749/minnesota/9780816677948.001.0001.
Grier, David Alan. When Computers Were Human. Princeton University Press, 2013,
https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400849369.
Harari, Yuval Noah. Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind. Random House, 2014.
Hayles, N. Katherine. How We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary Technogenesis. University
of Chicago Press, 2012, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226321370.001.0001.
Healey, Christopher, and James Enns. “Attention and Visual Memory in Visualization and
Computer Graphics.” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 18, no. 7,
2011, pp. 1170–88, https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2011.127.
Hegarty, Mary. “The Cognitive Science of Visual-Spatial Displays: Implications for Design.” Topics
in Cognitive Science, vol. 3, no. 3, 2011, pp. 446–74, https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1756-8765.2011.01150.x.
Henrich, Joseph, and Richard McElreath. “The Evolution of Cultural Evolution.” Evolutionary
Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews: Issues, News, and Reviews, vol. 12, no. 3, 2003, pp.
123–35, https://doi.org/10.1002/evan.10110.
Hinrichs, Uta, et al. “In Defense of Sandcastles: Research Thinking through Visualization in Digital
Humanities.” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, vol. 34, no. Supplement 1, 2019, pp. i80–99,
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqy051.
Hollan, James, et al. “Distributed Cognition: Toward a New Foundation for Human-Computer
Interaction Research.” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), vol. 7, no.
2, 2000, pp. 174–96, https://doi.org/10.1145/353485.353487.
Hutchins, Edwin. Cognition in the Wild. MIT press, 1995, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/
1881.001.0001.
---. “The Distributed Cognition Perspective on Human Interaction.” Roots of Human Sociality,
Routledge, 2020, pp. 375–98, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003135517-19.
Jänicke, Stefan, et al. “Visual Text Analysis in Digital Humanities.” Computer Graphics Forum, vol.
36, no. 6, 2017, pp. 226–50. Wiley Online Library, https://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12873.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

29

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Jiang, Yuchen, et al. “Quo Vadis Artificial Intelligence?” Discover Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2, no. 4,
2022, https://doi.org/10.1007/s44163-022-00022-8.
Kleymann, Rabea. Prototypes as Proto-Theory? A Plea for Digital Theory Formation. DH 2019
“Complexities,” 2019, Utrecht.
Kleymann, Rabea, et al. “Foreword to the Special Issue ‘Theorytellings: Epistemic Narratives in the
Digital Humanities.’” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 7, no. 4, 2022, https://doi.org/10.22148/
001c.55593.
Knapp, Steven, and Walter Benn Michaels. “Against Theory.” Critical Inquiry, vol. 8, no. 4, 1982,
pp. 723–42, https://doi.org/10.1086/448178.
---. “Here Is a Wave Poem That I Wrote . . . I Hope You Like It!” Again Theory: A Forum on
Language, Meaning, and Intent in the Time of Stochastic Parrots, edited by Matthew
Kirschenbaum, 2023, https://critinq.wordpress.com/2023/06/30/here-is-a-wave-poem-that-iwrote-i-hope-you-like-it/.
Koh, Adeline. “The Challenges of Digital Scholarship.” The Chronicle of Higher Education Blogs:
ProfHacker, 25 Jan. 2012, https://www.chronicle.com/blogs/profhacker/the-challenges-of-digitalscholarship.
Kusnick, Jakob, et al. Report on Narrative Visualization Techniques for OPDB Data. Technical
Report, InTaVia project, 2021, https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/documents/
downloadPublic?documentIds=080166e5e47d9524&appId=PPGMS.
Lamqaddam, Houda, et al. “Introducing Layers of Meaning (LoM): A Framework to Reduce
Semantic Distance of Visualization in Humanistic Research.” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 27, no. 2, 2020, pp. 1084–94, https://doi.org/10.1109/
tvcg.2020.3030426.
---. “When the Tech Kids Are Running Too Fast: Data Visualisation Through the Lens of Art
History Research.” 3rd IEEE Workshop for Visualization for the Digital Humanities (VIS4DH),
2018, https://vis4dh.dbvis.de/2018/.
Latour, Bruno. We Have Never Been Modern. Harvard University Press, 1993.
---. “Why Has Critique Run out of Steam? From Matters of Fact to Matters of Concern.” Critical
Inquiry, vol. 30, no. 2, 2004, pp. 225–48, https://doi.org/10.1086/421123.
Lettl, Christopher, et al. “Users’ Contributions to Radical Innovation: Evidence from Four Cases in
the Field of Medical Equipment Technology.” R&D Management, vol. 36, no. 3, 2006, pp.
251–72, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9310.2006.00431.x.
Licklider, Joseph C. R. “Man-Computer Symbiosis.” IRE Transactions on Human Factors in
Electronics, no. 1, 1960, pp. 4–11, https://doi.org/10.1109/THFE2.1960.4503259.
Liu, Alan. Friending the Past: The Sense of History in the Digital Age. University of Chicago Press,
2018, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226452005.001.0001.
Liu, Zhicheng, and John Stasko. “Mental Models, Visual Reasoning and Interaction in Information
Visualization: A Top-down Perspective.” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 16, no. 6, 2010, pp. 999–1008, https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2010.177.
MacMullen, Ian. “Survey Article: What Is ‘Post-Factual’ Politics?” Journal of Political Philosophy,
vol. 28, no. 1, 2020, pp. 97–116, https://doi.org/10.1111/jopp.12212.
---. “Survey Article: What Is ‘Post-Factual’ Politics?” Journal of Political Philosophy, vol. 28, no. 1,
2020, pp. 97–116, https://doi.org/10.1111/jopp.12212.
Manovich, Lev. Cultural Analytics. MIT Press, 2020, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/
11214.001.0001.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

30

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

---. Cultural Analytics: Visualizing Cultural Patterns in the Era of ‘More Media.’ Domus, Mar.
2009, http://manovich.net/index.php/projects/cultural-analytics-visualizing-cultural-patterns.
Masterman, Margaret. “The Intellect’s New Eye.” Times Literary Supplement, vol. 284, no. 17,
1962, pp. 401–29.
Mayr, Eva, et al. Integrated Visualization of Space and Time: A Distributed Cognition Perspective.
2018, https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/agvhw.
---. “Reasoning with Knowledge Graph Visualizations.” 6th International Conference Graphs and
Networks in the Humanities, 2022, https://graphentechnologien.hypotheses.org/tagungen/
graphentechnologien-2022.
---. “The Multiple Faces of Cultural Heritage.” 7th Workshop on Visualization for the Digital
Humanities (VIS4DH), 2022, pp. 13–18, https://doi.org/10.1109/VIS4DH57440.2022.00008.
Mayr, Eva, and Florian Windhager. “Vor welchem Hintergrund und mit Bezug auf was? Zur
polykontextualen Visualisierung kultureller Sammlungen. [Against Which Background and in
Relation to What?].” Objekte im Netz. Wissenschaftliche Sammlungen im digitalen Wandel,
edited by Udo Andraschke et al., 2020, pp. 235–45, https://doi.org/10.1515/
9783839455715-017.
McCarty, Willard. “A Telescope for the Mind?” Debates in the Digital Humanities 2012, edited by
Matthew K. Gold, 2012, pp. 113–23, https://doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/
9780816677948.003.0013.
---. “Collaborative Research in the Digital Humanities.” Collaborative Research in the Digital
Humanities, Routledge, 2016, pp. 1–10, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315572659.
McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. McGraw-Hill, 1964.
Meister, Jan Christoph. “Consensus Ex Machina? Consensus qua Machina!” Literary and
Linguistic Computing, vol. 10, no. 4, 1995, pp. 263–70, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/10.4.263.
Miles, Matthew B., and Michael A. Huberman. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded
Sourcebook. Sage, 1994.
Moretti, Franco. Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History. Verso, 2005.
Nightingale, Andrea Wilson. Spectacles of Truth in Classical Greek Philosophy: Theoria in Its
Cultural Context. Cambridge University Press, 2004, https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511482564.
Norman, Donald A. “Cognition in the Head and in the World: Introduction to a Debate on
Situated Cognition.” Cognitive Science, vol. 17, 1993, https://doi.org/10.1207/
s15516709cog1701_1.
---. The Design of Everyday Things: Revised and Expanded Edition. Basic Books, 2013.
---. Things That Make Us Smart: Defending Human Attributes in the Age of the Machine. William
Patrick Books, 1993.
Norton, Matthew. “Cultural Sociology Meets the Cognitive Wild: Advantages of the DC
Framework for Analyzing the Intersection of Culture and Cognition.” American Journal of
Cultural Sociology, vol. 8, 2020, pp. 45–46, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41290-019-00075-w.
Nowviskie, Bethany. “On the Origin of ‘Hack’ and ‘Yack.’” Debates in the Digital Humanities 2016,
edited by Matthew K. Gold and Lauren F. Klein, 2016, https://doi.org/10.5749/j.ctt1cn6thb.10.
Nyhan, Julianne, and Oliver Duke-Williams. “Joint and Multi-Authored Publication Patterns in the
Digital Humanities.” Literary and Linguistic Computing, vol. 29, no. 3, 2014, pp. 387–99,
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqu018.
Paivio, Allan. Mind and Its Evolution: A Dual Coding Theoretical Approach. Psychology Press,
2014, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315785233.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

31

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Pfisterer, Ulrich. “Big Bang Art History.” International Journal for Digital Art History, no. 3, 2018,
https://doi.org/10.11588/dah.2018.3.49916.
Piper, Andrew. “There Will Be Numbers.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 1, no. 1, 2016,
https://doi.org/10.22148/16.006.
Plumb, John H., editor. Crisis in the Humanities. Penguin Books, 1964.
Poole, Alex H. “The Conceptual Ecology of Digital Humanities.” Journal of Documentation, vol.
73, no. 1, 2017, pp. 91–122, https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-05-2016-0065.
Radnejad, Amir Bahman, et al. “Design Thinking in Responding to Disruptive Innovation: A Case
Study.” The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation, vol. 23, no. 1, 2022, pp.
39–54, https://doi.org/10.1177/14657503211033940.
Ramsay, Stephen. Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism. University of Illinois Press,
2011, https://doi.org/10.5406/illinois/9780252036415.001.0001.
Reed, Ashley. Managing an Established Digital Humanities Project: Principles and Practices from
the Twentieth Year of the William Blake Archive. 2014, http://hdl.handle.net/10919/101823.
Reitter, Paul, and Chad Wellmon. Permanent Crisis: The Humanities in a Disenchanted Age.
University of Chicago Press.
Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human
Evolution. University of Chicago Press, 2008.
Rosa, Hartmut, et al. Soziologische Theorien. UTB, 2018, https://doi.org/10.36198/9783838549927.
Rosnay, Joel de. The Macroscope: A New World Scientific System. Harper Collins, 1979.
Roth, Camille. “Digital, Digitized, and Numerical Humanities.” Digital Scholarship in the
Humanities, vol. 34, no. 3, 2019, pp. 616–32, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqy057.
Salisu, Saminu, et al. “Shapes of Time: Visualizing Set Changes over Time in Cultural Heritage
Collections.” EuroVis 2019 – PostersCompendium, Eurographics, 2019, pp. 45–47,
https://doi.org/10.2312/eurp20191142.
Scaife, Mike, and Yvonne Rogers. “External Cognition: How Do Graphical Representations Work?”
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 45, no. 2, 1996, pp. 185–213,
https://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.1996.0048.
Schnapp, Jeffrey, et al. A Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0. 2009, https://
www.humanitiesblast.com/manifesto/Manifesto_V2.pdf.
Schnotz, Wolfgang, and Christian Kürschner. “External and Internal Representations in the
Acquisition and Use of Knowledge: Visualization Effects on Mental Model Construction.”
Instructional Science, vol. 36, no. 3, 2008, pp. 175–90, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11251-007-9029-2.
Sennet, Richard. The Craftsman. Yale University Press, 2008.
Shoemate, Ben. “Einstein Never Said That….” Medium, 2 Feb. 2021, https://medium.com/benshoemate/einstein-never-said-that-9e72c7bbe658.
Siemens, Lynne. “‘It’s a Team If You Use “Reply All”’: An Exploration of Research Teams in
Digital Humanities Environments.” Literary and Linguistic Computing, vol. 24, no. 2, 2009, pp.
225–33, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqp009.
Sinclair, Stéfan, and Geoffrey Rockwell. “Text Analysis and Visualization: Making Meaning
Count.” A New Companion to Digital Humanities, 2015, pp. 274–90, https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781118680605.ch19.
Sloterdijk, Peter. “The Plunge and the Turn. Speech on Heidegger’s Thinking in Motion.” Not
Saved. Essays after Heidegger, Polity Press, 2016, pp. 1–48.
Staley, David. “Visualization-Ism: An Art History.” Interface, vol. 2, no. 6, 2002.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

32

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Stefaner, Moritz. “Worlds, Not Stories.” Well-Formed Data, 2 Mar. 2014, http://wellformeddata.net/archives/1027/worlds-not-stories.
Suchman, Lucy A. Human-Machine Reconfigurations: Plans and Situated Actions. Cambridge
University Press, 2007, https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511808418.
---. Plans and Situated Actions: The Problem of Human-Machine Communication. Cambridge
University Press, 1987.
Thomas, James J., and Kristin A. Cook. Illuminating the Path: The Research and Development
Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE Computer Society, 2005.
Turing, Alan. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence.” Mind, vol. 59, no. 236, 1950, pp. 433–60,
https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433.
Tversky, Barbara. “Multiple Models. In the Mind and in the World.” Historical Social Research/
Historische Sozialforschung, Supplement 31, 2018, pp. 59–65, https://doi.org/10.12759/
hsr.suppl.31.2018.59-65.
---. “Visualizing Thought.” Topics in Cognitive Science, vol. 3, no. 3, 2011, pp. 499–535,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2010.01113.x.
Underwood, Ted. “On Transitive and Intransitive Uses of the Verb ‘Theorize.’” The Stone and the
Shell, 22 Oct. 2011, https://tedunderwood.com/2011/10/22/on-transitive-and-intransitive-usesof-the-verb-to-theorize/.
Van Zundert, Joris J. “Screwmeneutics and Hermenumericals: The Computationality of
Hermeneutics.” A New Companion to Digital Humanities, 2015, pp. 331–47, https://doi.org/
10.1002/9781118680605.ch23.
Vasari, Giorgio. The Lives of the Artists. 1550. Reissue ed., Oxford University Press, 2008.
Verganti, Roberto. “Design, Meanings, and Radical Innovation: A Metamodel and a Research
Agenda.” Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 25, no. 5, 2008, pp. 436–56,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5885.2008.00313.x.
Warwick, Claire. “Building Ttheories or Theories of Building? A Tension at the Heart of Digital
Humanities.” A New Companion to Digital Humanities, 2015, pp. 538–52, https://doi.org/
10.1002/9781118680605.ch37.
Weitin, Thomas, et al. “Auslegen und Ausrechnen. Zum Verhältnis hermeneutischer und
quantitativer Verfahren in den Literaturwissenschaften.” Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und
Linguistik, vol. 46, 2016, pp. 103–15, https://doi.org/10.1007/s41244-016-0004-8.
Windhager, Florian. A Synoptic Visualization Framework for Artwork Collection Data and Artist
Biographies. 2020. University of Vienna, Doctoral Thesis, http://othes.univie.ac.at/65279/.
Windhager, Florian, et al. “Uncertainty of What and for Whom—And Does Anyone Care?
Propositions for Cultural Collection Visualization.” 4th IEEE Workshop on Visualization for the
Digital Humanities (VIS4DH), 2019, pp. 1–5, https://vis4dh.dbvis.de/2019/.
---. “Visualization of Cultural Heritage Collection Data: State of the Art and Future Challenges.”
IEEE Transactions on Visualization & Computer Graphics, vol. 25, no. 6, 2018, pp. 2311–30,
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2830759.
---. “Visuelle Analyse Und Kuratierung von Biographiedaten [Visual Analysis and Curation of
Biography Data].” Digital History, De Gruyter Oldenbourg, 2022, pp. 137–50, https://doi.org/
10.1515/9783110757101-008.
Windhager, Florian, and Eva Mayr. “Mental Models and Visualization.” Visualization Psychology,
edited by Danielle Albers Szafir, Springer, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34738-2_3.
Wölfflin, Heinrich. Principles of Art History: The Problem of the Development of Style in Early
Modern Art: One Hundredth Anniversary Edition. 1915. Getty Publications, 2015.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

33

Digital Humanities and Distributed Cognition: From a Lack of Theory to its Visual Augmentation

Zaharieva, Maia, et al. “Film Analysis of Archived Documentaries.” IEEE MultiMedia Magazine,
vol. 18, no. 2, 2011, pp. 38–47, https://doi.org/10.1109/MMUL.2010.67.
Ziemann, Benjamin. “The Theory of Functional Differentiation and the History of Modern
Society. Reflections on the Reception of Systems Theory in Recent Historiography.” Soziale
Systeme, vol. 13, no. 1–2, 2007, pp. 220–29, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110509229-019.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

34

