Journal of
Cultural Analytics

July 18, 2020

Familial Places in Jim Crow Spaces:
Kinship, Demography, and the Color
Line in William Faulkner’s
Yoknapatawpha County
Johannes Burgers

ARTICLE INFO
Peer-Reviewed

By:

Jay

ABSTRACT
Watson,

Matthew

Hosted out of the University of Virginia, Digital Yoknapatawpha is an international

Wilkens

collaboration between scholars of William Faulkner and technologists at the Institute for

Article DOI: 10.22148/001c.14112

Advanced Technology in the Humanities. The project team has encoded all the locations,

Dataverse DOI: 10.7910/DVN/KAVVAA
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549

characters, and events in Faulkner’s Yoknapatawpha fictions into a relational database that
powers an open-access web-portal. Users can avail of an atlas of “deep-maps,” data
visualizations, archival material, and aural and visual resources to explore, teach, and
research his works. Using techniques common in ecology and demography, this paper
leverages the data to investigate the relationship between race, kinship, and space. It
concludes, tentatively, that the social world of Yoknapatawpha is far more rigidly bounded
along racial lines than current scholarship suggests. In particular, most interactions between
characters from different races happen in a familial context, and are the result of racialized
labor exploitation or outright enslavement of African-American families by AngloAmericans. The lack of interactions outside of this context underscores just how little
agency non-white characters have in Faulkner’s fiction.

In the summer of 2019, the Digital Yoknapatawpha (DY) project quietly passed a
resounding milestone: after eight years of laborious coding, all of the
Yoknapatawpha fictions had been entered into the database. 1 The data represent a
corpus of all of the locations, characters, and events from a significant share of
William Faulkner’s oeuvre.2 While this data is continuously being updated and
refined, it is robust enough to start probing commonly held critical assumptions
about Faulkner’s work.3 A key area of investigation is the social world of
Yoknapatawpha. The database makes it possible to study interactions between
characters within individual texts, and across the corpus. In some respects, the data
confirms much of what has already been written about the racial, class, and gender
tensions between the different social groups in Faulkner’s work. This is

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

unsurprising. Faulkner has benefitted from some of the most sustained and
perspicacious literary scholarship of any American author. That being said, while
DY is able to demonstrate the value of this scholarship in a new light, it also reveals
novel insights into character relationships that would otherwise remain hidden. In
particular, ecological and demographic models suggest that, on the whole,
Faulkner’s social world was more rigidly bounded by race, class, and gender
differences than previous scholarship has documented. Notably, interactions
between characters from different backgrounds occur almost exclusively within the
context of economic relationships between wealthy white families and the AfricanAmerican families they enslaved or employed.
At scale, the image that emerges of Yoknapatawpha’s social world is therefore a
deeply conservative one. True, some of Faulkner’s fiction questions the boundaries
of the white supremacist power structure, but the data suggest that a significant share
of his work reproduces it too. To what extent Faulkner’s reproduction of the color
line is a vehicle for demonstrating its constructedness, and to what extent this is a
projection of his own social world, is not easy to parse. Nor is it easy to square
Faulkner’s version of the South with other accounts of the lived experience of
enslavement, and, subsequently, segregation in a small Mississippi town during this
period. Not exclusively of interest to Faulkner scholars, these interactions across the
color line also raise critical questions about race relations in the Jim Crow South
more generally. The relative paucity of interactions between different races outside
of the spatial intimacy created through racialized labor practices, speaks to the
complex network of formal and informal social codes necessary to maintain
segregation.
Within the Digital Humanities there is an extensive and growing body of scholarship
on identifying character entities and their relationships in fiction. The bulk of this
work has been done through supervised and unsupervised Natural Language
Processing, character network analysis, or a combination thereof. These broader
methodologies have utilized specific techniques including, but not limited to,
inferring latent character types, sentiment analysis, and conversational and cooccurrence network visualization.4 These forms of character analysis can be
incredibly powerful, because they operate at a very large scale.

2

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

This paper contributes to this scholarship from quite a different perspective.
Operating at a much smaller scale, it was possible to identify all of the characters
manually, and give them attributes consistent with biographical and demographic
data; something that NLP methods still struggle to do with literary fiction.5 This
character data can be situated in space in time by connecting it to location and event
data. Using techniques from the biological and social sciences, it is possible to create
corpus-wide, dynamic demographic views into how characters from different
backgrounds interact with one another in Yoknapatawpha. While these techniques
provide an incredibly rich view into character interactions, the critical issue is that
fictional characters, of course, are neither like the animals biologists study nor the
people described by the social sciences; they have an ontology that is uniquely their
own. As Andrew Piper explains, characters are not necessarily “singularly deep
mirrors of ourselves,” but rather the practice of characterization hews more closely
to its “etymological origins as a sense of being representative, general, or
‘characteristic.’”6 The extent to which these biological and social science models
can articulate meaningful explanations of the interactions between characters in
fictional texts is therefore by no means a settled matter.

Literature Review: Faulkner and the Color Line
In her important work on Faulkner’s treatment of race in his later novels, Theresa
Towner remarks, that “race” and “art” become “functions of one another.”7 Reading
Faulkner and reading race are, quite often, the same thing, and work in this area has
a long and rich genealogy with landmark studies such as Eric Sundquist’s Faulkner:
The House Divided, Philip Weinstein’s What Else But Love?, and Thadious Davis’s
Games of Property. It is undoubtedly one of the central themes of his work, and
scholars have been wide-ranging in their approaches and theoretical perspectives, to
wit: John Duvall has shown how Faulkner uses performative “figurations of
blackness,” to probe “white masculine identity”; Michael Wainwright has unearthed
the connections between Faulkner’s writing and Darwinian thought; in a quite
different fashion, Dorothy Stringer explores the uneasy associations between
representations of blackness, trauma, racial violence, and the phallus with respect to
psychoanalysis; taking a more historical perspective, Leigh Ann Duck highlights
Faulkner’s rejection and internalization of Jim Crow’s ideological framework; Keith
Cartwright highlights his indebtedness to African cultural forms; and, most recently,
3

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

Kristin Fujie points to the aural and visual connections between his fiction and
African-Americans on film.8 These works represent just a sliver of the available
scholarship. There is no way to do justice to the nuances and differences between
them, but by dint of their methodological frameworks, they all marshal closereadings to demonstrate how Faulkner engages the larger structural issues of race by
unpacking his epistemology of racialization within select scenes from his extensive
corpus.
By and large, these works recast Faulkner’s representations of race in a more
revisionary light. Whereas Faulkner’s own life was marked by conservatism and
racial views that were consistent with that of white moderates in the segregated
South,9 there is a sizeable body of scholarship that contends that the most significant
parts of Faulkner’s work deploys strategic subversions of white supremacist
ideology. Thus, while Davis admits that she initially found Faulkner’s
representations of African-Americans “reactionary” and “retrograde,” subsequent
readings revealed to her that Go Down, Moses is “still problematic,” but through an
extended series of close readings of the mixed ancestry, enslaved character, Tomey’s
Turl, she demonstrates that he functions to “transgress and disrupt the power and
authority of whites over both lives and stories.”10 John Duvall’s analysis of
Mosquitos, The Sound and the Fury, Sanctuary, and Go Down, Moses, likewise
recognizes that while Faulkner, the public persona, could be racist, his “fiction is
populated by white characters that are not exactly white,” which is “a testament to
an artistic imagination that recognized the contingency of racial identity.”11 A more
radical version of this premise is one articulated by Christina Thyssen. Through a
reading that relies largely on two select stories from Go Down, Moses, she argues
that in “Pantaloon in Black,” Faulkner arrives at a form of “literary ghosting where
words and events arrive from a space of both pre- and postcategorical indefinition
that blasts open the plantational text as the emblematic figure of historicism and the
suicidal thought models of Western traditions.”12 Each of these accounts represents
a trend in Faulkner studies to acknowledge his problematic pronouncements on race,
while at the same time offering a more generous reading of race relations in a select
number of his texts.
What is left fragmentary, implied, or otherwise unclear, is the picture that emerges
when all of the scenes are tied together and viewed in the aggregate. This is not due
4

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

to any scholarly oversight, but without the robust dataset available in the DY
database, such analysis is simply not possible. To be sure, some of the above scholars
have been invaluable contributors to DY, and this paper is therefore both
complementary to and complimentary of their foundational work.
Having said that, the aggregate view of Yoknapatawpha is far whiter than even
Faulkner might have imagined. The demographic makeup of Lafayette, during this
period consisted of an African-American population of around 35-40%, and, in any
event, never exceeded the number of white residents.13 Faulkner actually doubles
this percentage on his map for Absalom, Absalom! in 1936, and claims AfricanAmericans are 68% of the county’s population.14 Yet, within the corpus, characters
with African-American ancestry only represent a little under 20% of the characters
present at events. Curiously, African-Americans are over-represented in Faulkner’s
own demographics, but far less visible in his text. When they are visible, it is usually
by virtue of a white character being present. It is very rare that characters with
African-American ancestry are present in an event without white characters there as
well (3.5%).15 In this respect, the scenes that Thyssen highlights for her close reading
constitute .04% of the entire corpus, and are far from representative of Faulkner’s
work in its entirety. Arguably, their singularity makes the scenes so notable and rich,
but it is much more specious to make larger claims about his views on race based on
these very exceptional instances alone.
The real power of the DY database, though, is that it allows for complex relational
queries that show which characters are where and under what conditions. These
queries, once again, cannot understand the nuances of race in specific situations, but
they do reveal a generalized pattern of what types of character combinations are
more or less common. Establishing a pattern of regular character combinations, in
turn, signals the importance of those instances in the corpus where there is a
deviation from the pattern, prompting textual exegesis. To name but a few notable
exceptions to the regular order of things in Faulkner’s world: Quentin Compson
meeting an African-American outside of Yoknapatawpha in The Sound and the
Fury, a white woman being alone in a house with an African-American man in “A
Rose for Emily”, or the fact that the only time the Chickasaw are ever present in the
town of Jefferson is when they give up their land deed in Requiem for a Nun and
attend Thomas Sutpen’s wedding in Absalom, Absalom!.16 Reading at scale therefore
5

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

does not obviate previous close readings, but instead underscores a similar point
made by Piper that with regard to characterization, “small cues carry a large
effect.”17

Data Operationalization: Characters as People
The DY database consists of three related tables: locations, characters, and events.
Locations are those spatial entities that either exist as a physical place in the text or
are mentioned, and characters are those human entities that are either present or
mentioned at locations. An event is a textual unit that demarcates one continuous
action by one or more characters at one location for a discrete period of time. The
three tables are keyed to each other in a relational database that allows the data to be
viewed from the perspective of locations, characters, events, a combination of the
three, or all three simultaneously, as with the main interface.
The process of data entry raises a whole host of practical and theoretical questions
that, though interesting in their own right, are not germane here.18 Suffice it to say
that any data extracted from the database is measuring very specific things in a very
specific way. A full overview of the data model and the encoding parameters is
available through the instructions to the editors on the data creation portal.19
Nevertheless, there are a few qualifications to the data that are pertinent to the
subsequent analysis.
The data does not represent the “totality” of Faulkner’s work. Primarily, this data is
only for all the texts that either take place in or feature characters from
Yoknapatawpha. Novels such as Soldier’s Pay, Mosquitos, and The Wild Palms are
not part of the data set. A further constraint is that the data has been encoded using
specific editions of Faulkner’s texts, although variance between editions has been
noted, at the moment there is no way to represent the variances. More
philosophically, totality implies that Faulkner had a grand vision, when, in fact, it is
clear that he returned to Jefferson and Yoknapatawpha over and over again
throughout his career in continuously different ways. From a computational
perspective, totality is also a problematic term. There are different ways to aggregate
and represent the data, but to do so in a meaningful way requires subsetting and
highlighting specific attributes. With regard to specific data sets, this study
6

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

operationalizes a subset of attributes from the character, location, and event tables.
Data creation for these three tables was highly interpretive and, going forward, it is
useful to qualify what this data means.
Characters – Editors make several critical assumptions about the way Faulkner
conceived of race and class. Written from 1929-1962, most of the Yoknapatawpha
stories reflect how Faulkner conceptualized, articulated, and subverted notions of
“race” before the Civil Rights Movement. In doing so, Faulkner, at times, adopted
the language and ideological precepts of the Jim Crow South, while at other times
called them into question. As much as possible, DY tries to reproduce his racial views
with the understanding that these have since been rejected and are offensive to
modern sensibilities. A central part of this methodology is the assumption that every
interaction in Yoknapatawpha has a racial component, and when the race of a
character is not stated in the text explicitly, the editors draw on previous scholarship
and contextual clues to establish race. One guiding principle is that Faulkner tends
to make the race of his non-white characters explicit, and leaves white characters
racially unmarked. In Faulkner, whiteness is frequently the absence of race.20
Although class is a fluid concept, Faulkner’s is a highly hierarchical society, and
generally a character’s source of economic sufficiency can be used to classify him
or her as upper class, middle class, lower class, or “poor white.” While this method
is certainly not ironclad, usually white characters can be placed on the social ladder
with a high degree of confidence. Meanwhile, Native Americans do not fit into this
class system, and their status is based on their position in the tribe. Meanwhile,
African-Americans are severely limited in their economic and social mobility due to
the South’s racial apartheid regime. They might have class status within their own
community, but in DY’s interpretation of Faulkner’s sociology African-Americans
are either enslaved or free.
Perhaps the most fundamental hurdle to entering “all” the characters in Faulkner’s
world are uncountable collections of people. There are scale differences between
“suitors,”21 “a committee of Baptists,”22 “gang,”23 and Jefferson townspeople,24 but
there is no way to consistently distinguish what the orders of magnitude are. They
have been given the qualifier “group,” but this serves a descriptive function and
cannot be quantified. Events that include groups constitute roughly 20% of the
7

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

corpus, and are therefore not insubstantial. Still, since groups tend to produce a large
number of unknowns, they have been left out of this analysis. In the future, it would
be interesting to test if there is a difference between character interactions when
groups are present.
Locations – The most notable issue with locations is their positional variability.
Stephen Railton and Christopher Rieger demonstrate that Faulkner was consistent
with the distance ratios of his county, but locations can vary quite a bit, even within
texts.25 This, coupled with the inherent problem of locating places through textual
clues,26 has led to locations shifting from text to text. As such, there is no “total”
map of Yoknapatawpha, only a series of individual maps for each story.
Events – Events measure when a character or characters occur at a location, and store
the chronological order, order in the text, and narrative mode. Despite the richness
of this information, as of yet no way to consistently establish how long an event is
in terms of text time or word count, its duration in narrative time, its saliency, or
what specific roles characters play. The practical result is that if two characters occur
in one place n times, it may be that one character is there for a lengthier period of
time and plays a more important role. Therefore, iterating characters across locations
and events results in an unweighted frequency model, where each individual count
is not necessarily equal.

Birds of a Feather: Co-Occurrence Analysis and Demography
The caveats above should not detract from the fact that there is an incredible amount
of data available that allows users to explore Yoknapatawpha from a considerable
variety of perspectives. One established method for investigating character
interactions in fiction is through social network analysis. Digital Yoknapatawpha
makes this option available to users as well. Team member Rafael Alvardo has
created a series of visualization tools that allow users to investigate character
interactions through character-character force directed graphs, and characterlocation co-occurrence through both force directed and bipartite graphs. Both types
of graphs map connections between characters or between a character and a location
weighted by the frequency of the occurrence.27 There are several limitations to such
graphs for the purposes of understanding social interactions. First, as Markus John

8

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

et al. point out, generally such social network diagrams tend to be static summations
of an entire text, whereas the social connections make more sense when they are
related to different moments in the text.28 Second, such diagrams can show character
centrality or group homophily, but it is harder to detect and quantify the patterns of
character interactions based on an intersection of their demographic attributes.
Relatedly, co-occurrence networks create edges between nodes whenever two
characters occur in the same event. This correspondence makes sense for pairs, but
this has the risk of overdetermining relationships when multiple characters are
present in the same space. It may be that a character’s presence in an event is
incidental and not part of a pattern.
To understand the social world of a text requires knowing what type of characters
interact with one another, how often, and under what conditions. One powerful
technique for understanding population patterns is co-occurrence analysis. In
ecology, co-occurrence analysis is used to understand the “rules of assembly” in an
ecosystem by noting the presence and absence of species at particular sites at
particular times.29 Inferential statistics are then used to determine if a co-occurrence
is:
1) Positive: If species is present x then species y is present.
2) Negative: If species x is present then species y is absent.
3) Random: Species x and species y occur together in a pattern that is neither
positive nor negative relative to their share of the total population.
There are several ways of doing this, and a particularly accurate version is the
combinatorics method developed by Joseph Veech. This calculates the ratio between
all the possible combinations of observed co-occurrences, and the total number of
possible co-occurrences.30 While the computation is involved, Veech and a group of
researchers have turned the algorithm into a library for the statistical language R for
wide-spread use.31 The advantage of this method is that it circumvents the various
weighting issues with events. Instead, it establishes the frequency of co-occurrence
between two types of characters and whether that co-occurrence is positive,
negative, or random. These relationships – positive, negative, and random – should
be understood as purely statistical. For instance, a pair of lovers and a slaver and an
enslaved person can both co-occur positively, but for significantly different reasons.
In a similar sense, as in nature, nothing in Faulkner is ever truly random. All species
9

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

within one ecosystem have a probability of co-occurring together by virtue of their
area of habitation.32 Just the same, Faulkner’s characters can co-occur because they
are in the same fictional world. The crucial distinction is that some co-occurrences
are more or less stochastic than others.
Co-occurrence analysis establishes the contours of relationship patterns in
Yoknapatawpha, and can also be used to determine what attributes affect social
interactions. In Faulkner’s version of the American South, one of the key features of
social organization was kinship. Though the population of Northern Mississippi has
always been transitory, communities like Oxford were established, in no small part,
through familial chain migration.33 In these early antebellum years, Wainwright
explains that, “[s]ociety had meant accumulated kinship.”34 Power in these
communities was usually arrogated by the prominent slave-holding families and the
paternalistic plantation societies they created, where white families lived side-byside with African-American families for generations.35 When these societies
collapsed after the war, industrialization and modernization significantly increased
labor mobility and migration into the South, enhancing the potential for exogamy
and rendering the erstwhile rigid social boundaries more brittle.36 Situated within
these social forces, Faulkner’s characters use family and kinship ties as a bulwark
against the erosion of social barriers, even if notions of familial purity were based
on fantasies of unadulterated and un-adulterous patrilineal descent.37 Thus, to
understand possible transgressions of these boundaries requires looking at family
interactions.
The families in DY include:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
8)
9)
10)
11)

Benbow
Compson
Gibson
Issetibbeha | Ikkemotubbe
McCallum | MacCallum
McCaslin
Sartoris
Snopes
Stevens
Strother
Sutpen
10

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

12) Bundren
13) De Spain38
Running the co-occur analysis reveals that the thirteen families can be paired in 78
different ways and that there is a positive co-occurrence between 12 of them (see
Table 1).39
Family 1

Ancestry

Family 2

Ancestry

Sartoris

Anglo-American

Strother

African-American/Anglo-American

CoOccurrence
501*

Compson

Anglo-American

Gibson

African-American

165*

Issetibbeha

Native American

McCaslin

Anglo-American/African-American

91*

Compson

Anglo-American

Sutpen

Anglo-American/Anglo-American

81*

Benbow

Anglo-American

Sartoris

Anglo-American/Anglo-American

77*

De Spain

Anglo-American

McCaslin

Anglo-American/African-American

71*

Table 1. Co-Occurrence of Families
Note. There is no way to do co-occurrence analysis in Faulkner without running into the issue of double counting.
Faulkner worked short stories into novels throughout his career. For example, in the data above, the set of Saturday
Evening Post stories about the Civil War that will eventually be used for the novel The Unvanquished are all counted,
meaning that the Strother and Sartoris families are counted for both the short stories and their ultimate novelization.
In some cases, these stories vary very little, in others there are significant revisions. Distinguishing whether a text is
a reinvention or a duplication raises serious issues of textual genetics. Suffice to say, that all of the texts included were
different enough from each other to merit encoding into the database.
*

p< .05 and top 50th percentile

What stands out are the top three families. The first two are relationships between
families in which one upper class white family either enslaved an African-American
family (Sartoris-Strother) or is exploiting them for domestic labor (CompsonGibson). The third family relationship of significance is that of Issetibbeha and
McCaslin, which, once again, points to familial connection between two families
from different social backgrounds. It should be noted that the Issetibbeha-McCaslin
co-occurrences are mostly from Go Down, Moses (83%), and, largely the result of
the relationship between Sam Fathers – who is part Native American, AfricanAmerican, and Anglo-American – and Ike McCaslin – who is white upper class.
These top three co-occurrences constitute 60% of all positive family co-occurrences,

11

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

and suggest that family connections make interactions between different social
groups possible in Yoknapatawpha.
A more fine-grained way of investigating character interactions is by looking at the
intersection of attributes. DY has a comprehensive set of controlled vocabularies for
race, class, and gender, and by concatenating them characters can be turned into
“species.” Because some character attributes were rarely used, they were
consolidated into adjacent categories,40 resulting in the controlled vocabularies in
Table 2. The terms below can be combined in 50 different ways, 37 of the
combinations occur in the fiction. 41

Race

Class

Gender

Black
Indeterminable
Indian
MixedBlackIndian
MixedBlackWhite
MixedIndianWhite
MixedIndianWhiteBlack
White

Upper Class
Middle Class
Lower Class
Poor White
Indeterminable
Indian Tribal Member
Enslaved Black
Free Black

Female
Male

Table 2. Controlled vocabularies used for creating character types.

To test the effect of family on the diversity of co-occurrence, the concept of familial
relationships requires some refining. There are multiple ways to conceive of how
families might interact with one another:
1) Intra-familial: within families
2) Inter-familial: between families
3) Extra-familial: between a member of the family and a character not
identified with a family
4) General population: co-occurrence in which there is no interaction with a
major family.
In the figures below, Family Present has been defined as all intra- and inter-familial
events, which are those where at least two characters are from different families or
from the same family. Family Absent includes any extra-familial and general
12

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

population characters, and indicates those events where there is at most one character
present from a major family. These charts can be visually overwhelming, but the
general pattern is that there are more positive co-occurrences of different types of
characters with family (48) than without family (22).

Figure 1. Family Present Co-Occurrences. Analysis when there were intra- and inter-familial co-occurrences
resulted in 256 pairs. 48 were positive, 100 were negative, and 108 were random.

Figure 2. Family Absent Co-Occurrences. Analysis when there were extra-familial co-occurrences and cooccurrences among the general population resulted in 165 pairs. 22 were positive, 74 were negative, and 69 were
random.

13

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

Breaking down the individual co-occurrence pairs reveals that the majority of
relationships in the corpus are those between white upper-class families and AfricanAmericans who are either enslaved or exploited for domestic labor. Table 3 merges
the 90th percentile of both the Family Absent and the Family Present probabilities
tables.
Pair Change
Added
Added
Added
Added
Added
Unchanged
Unchanged
Dropped

Character Type 1 Character Type 2
White Upper
White Upper
Class Female
Class Male
White Upper
Black Free Male
Class Male
Black Enslaved
White Upper
Male
Class Male
Black Free
White Upper
Female
Class Male
Black Enslaved
White Upper
Male
Class Female
White Lower
White Lower
Class Female
Class Male
White Middle
White Middle
Class Female
Class Male
MxdIndianWhite
White Upper
Poor White Male
Class Male

Family Absent

Family Present

%Change

85

781*

818%

103

359*

249%

10

304*

2,940%

29

215*

641%

1

185*

18,400%

318*

143

-55%

129*

46

-64%

53*

63

18%

Table 3. Family Absent and Family Present Co-Occurrence Changes Positive Co-Occurrences
Note. The combinatorics algorithm was run on two different data sets: Family Present (2666 events) and Family Absent
(3677 events). By separating out the two data sets, certain pairs occur either more or fewer times. This increase or
decrease causes changes in the probability of the co-occurrence being positive, negative, or random. Hence, the added
rows were not positive pairings in the Family Absent data set. Meanwhile, some pairings remained positive even if the
total amount of co-occurrences varied between the Family Present and the Family Absent data sets. Only one was dropped
– the positive co-occurrences between the MixedIndianWhite Poor White Male and the Upper Class White Male. This is
the relationship between Boon Hoggenbeck and Lucius Priest in The Reivers. Boon co-occurs positively when only
Lucius is present, but not when Lucius is with his family.
*

p< .05 and 90th percentile

The contrast between the two data sets is marked. The added pairs are almost
exclusively indicative of enslavement or exploitative domestic service. White upperclass characters from major families co-occur with enslaved or free AfricanAmericans over seven times more often (1,063) than when there is no familial
connection between African-American and Anglo-American (143). Generally,
14

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

interactions between Anglo-American and African-American characters outside of
a labor relationship between families are exceedingly rare. For example, with regard
to enslaved African-Americans, only once in the entire data subset of nearly four
thousand events does it happen that a white upper-class woman not from a major
family co-occurs with a black enslaved male. Significantly, this is in Light in August
when Gail Hightower’s mother meets her father-in-law, and, he, knowing his son’s
abolitionist politics, takes his two enslaved servants with him.42 Even more striking,
African-American men and women in any context, co-occur with each other ten
times fewer (110) than they do with their Anglo-American enslavers or employers.
More to the point, the narrative spends more time on African-Americans in relation
to Anglo-Americans than it does on African-Americans in connection with each
other. Whatever racial politics may play out on a local level within an event, globally
the picture that emerges is one in which African-Americans rarely exist outside of
their relationship with Anglo-American characters. These relationships are, by and
large, the result of racialized labor exploitation, if not outright enslavement.
More generally, the data reveal several different social groups that are consonant
with the broader sociology of the ante- and postbellum South, and reproduce the
paternalistic system enforced by the plantocracy.43 African-Americans were bonded
to upper class Anglo-Americans by virtue of enslavement and, later, racialized labor
practices. These relationships were intimately tied to family, and are consistent with
nineteenth century practices of framing economic exploitation of AfricanAmericans as a paternalistic relationship that normalizes conditions of white
supremacy. With familial names like “Uncle” and “Aunt” for enslaved AfricanAmericans and, later, servants, white families could maintain a façade of familial
comity to mask deeply coercive and abusive labor practices.44 Importantly, by the
time Faulkner is writing, a whole family of African-American domestic workers
living with their white employers, as is the case in Flags in the Dust and The Sound
and the Fury, would have been anachronistic. Most domestic work was performed
by African-American women whose family were seen as an unnecessary distraction
to white employers, and, consequently, single African-American women were
highly regarded.45 In contradistinction to this, Faulkner is reproducing the plantation
social order well into the twentieth century. To be sure, Faulkner complicates
plantation relationships in works like Absalom, Absalom! and Go Down, Moses
where kinship between families was not always imagined, but the result of illicit
15

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

relationships between Anglo-Americans and African-Americans. Still, even here
there are echoes of paternalism.46
Meanwhile, the non-upper class white population stood outside of this dyad as a
different social grouping that had more contact with one another than with wealthy
Anglo-Americans and African-Americans. Indeed, Faulkner’s separation of the
social worlds of the Old South plantocracy and the masses of dispossessed whites of
the New South, is something early critics like Malcolm Cowley already observed.47
Yet, within this broad contrast there is quite some nuance. There is pronounced
stratification between the lower class and middle class characters. The fourth group
in Yoknapatawpha, Native Americans, do not co-occur with any character type
positively in either a familial or a non-familial context, and are quite separate from
Yoknapatawpha at large.48
Similar techniques also provide a more detailed look at how family affects racial
interaction at the scale of the novel. Figure 3 shows the number of positive and
negative cross-gender and cross-racial pairs divided into four different categories of
familial relationships and bucketed by novel. For this chart, co-occurrence analysis
was run on all of the novels individually and subsetted into intra-familial, interfamilial, extra-familial relationships, and the general population. To highlight the
cross-racial relationships exclusively, this data model eliminates class as an attribute
for character type creation, leading to 28 pair possibilities. Also eliminated were any
mixed-gender co-occurrences between characters of the same race. All texts that did
not produce a statistically significant co-occurrence pattern were left out.49

16

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
-6
-7
Flags in The Sound Sanctuary Light in Absalom,
The
Go Down, Intruder in Requiem The Town
The
the Dust and the
(1931)
August Absalom! Hamlet
Moses the Dust for a Nun (1957)
Reivers
(1929)
Fury
(1932)
(1936)
(1940)
(1942)
(1948)
(1951)
(1962)
(1929)
Intra-Familial

Inter-Familial

Extra-Familial

General

Intra-Familial Negative

Inter-Familial Negative

Extra-Familial Negative

General Negative

Figure 3. Race and Gender Co-occurrence by Novel. Each text was analyzed for intra-familial, inter-familial, extrafamilial and general population co-occurrence by race and gender. All texts without a result were excluded.

Running from left to right, the series indicate a fluctuating pattern of cross-racial and
cross-gender interactions. The novels that have the most diverse co-occurrences are
Go Down, Moses and The Reivers. For Go Down, Moses, this is not entirely
surprising, given its position in the Faulkner canon as one of the texts that most fully
addresses the South’s complex racial legacy. The Reivers is, perhaps, the more
unanticipated result. A less canonical work, Faulkner’s last novel is about a ragtag
crew led in alternating fashion by Ned William McCaslin, Lucius Priest I, and Boon
Hogganbeck. Ned is the grandson of an enslaved woman and the McCaslin dynasty
patriarch, Lucius Quintin Carothers. Lucius Priest I is a young white scion of the
McCaslin planter aristocracy, and great-great-grandson to the same Lucius Quintin
Carothers. Finally, Boon is the Priest-family factotum with possible Native
American ancestry. The three mismatched characters spend their time getting into
various misadventures in and around Memphis, visiting brothels, race tracks, and
aristocratic mansions, and cavorting with an appropriately motley cast of characters
along the way.50
The concentration of diverse connections in only two novels paints quite a different
picture of race across Faulkner’s body of work than current scholarship suggests.
17

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

Undoubtedly, race is a thematic concern in other works, but co-occurrences between
diverse characters are rare, and when they do occur, they are usually the result of
family relationships. This very limited interaction pattern between different
character types, speaks more to white anxieties about race than it does about the
possible effects of racism on non-whites, who are largely excluded from the
equation. In fact, in only one text positive cross-racial co-occurrences happen
outside of a major family connection. In The Town, an African-American woman
and Anglo-American woman appear in eight events together. The majority of these
are the co-occurrences between the African-American wet nurse Old Het and
Mannie Hait, a white woman, who are the principle characters in a vignette modelled
after the short story “Mule in the Yard.” Finally, the high number of negative intrafamilial co-occurrences also bears some explaining. Because of the way the data is
set up, all events in which at least two family members occur are measured. It might
happen that a non-family member is present in these events. As these characters
appear less frequently when either of the two family members are present, these are
counted as negative co-occurrences. As insightful as co-occurrence analysis is, it
runs into trouble when dealing with smaller data sets. Nor can it reveal anything
about the modality of the co-occurrence. Mapping these co-occurrences onto their
locations reveals the effect of space on racial interactions.

Experimental Demography: Jim Crow Spaces and Family
Mapping demography in the American South during the Jim Crow era is by no
means a simple matter. In the North, housing segregation could be observed in
residence patterns, with less-desirable locations being occupied by AfricanAmericans. In the South, segregation was social, but not necessarily spatial. In place
was a type of “backyard” segregation, where domestic servants would live on or near
the property of their enslaver and later employer.51 The spatial and demographic data
required to represent the vast economic and social chasm between the alley and the
street-front has to be incredibly detailed. Even then, it only captures part of the social
dynamic, as “Negroes” during this period were by no means a static demographic
category. Instead, some African-Americans could change their racial status based on
their ability to pass, and changes in their economic circumstances.52 Faulkner, to a
certain extent, acknowledges both of these dynamics in his fiction, but the maps he

18

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

made and the population statistics he attributed to Yoknapatawpha are obviously
nowhere near detailed enough for traditional demographic methods.
DY has made a lot of headway in supplying interpretive data to start establishing a
demography of Yoknapatawpha, but there remain intractable problems with location
position and consistency. Nevertheless, with some modifications, a feature density
map or, “heatmap,” creates a visual approximation of character distribution. Such a
map breaks down the distribution of events by character attributes. Heatmaps
effectively create a proxy for population distribution, as certain types of characters
appear at certain locations more or fewer times. Any inconsistencies between maps
will also be elided through this process because fixed places are ignored, and the
frequency of different types of people at events becomes predominant. Since the
events are time-dependent, this frequency map does not capture one singular
moment in time, like a census, but instead the layering of all moments in time onto
one space. It may be that some of the events happen well over two hundred years
apart from each other. Through temporal accretion, the maps make it clear that
certain kinds of people are more likely to occur in some areas as opposed to others.
To generate the map below, several interpretive moves were made (see Figure 4).
First, some of the maps in DY have insets that either zoom into a location within
Yoknapatawpha, such as Frenchmen’s Bend in The Hamlet, or detail maps of places
outside of Yoknapatawpha, such as Memphis in Sanctuary.53 These insets had to be
consolidated back into the main map by translating and reducing the coordinates to
an area on the original map, or moving them into one point onto the “Region,”
“Nation,” and “World” insets to the right of the Yoknapatawpha map. These remappings reduce the precision of the data, but for the purposes of showing event
density, which operates at high frequencies over generalized areas, this is not
consequential. Second, the density function parameters were set so that each
heatmap layer was on the same scale. It also excluded any location where only one
character occurred, which causes stippling across the map, and gives these locations
more visual importance than they merit. To increase clarity, the number of races was
reduced from eight to four by re-classifying anyone with uncertain or multiple
ancestries as “mixed ancestry.”

19

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

The map represents eight significant areas of activity. The plantations of Compson,
McCaslin, Sutpen, and Sartoris surrounding the town, the old Chickasaw lands of
Ikkemotubbe to the far north of town, the town of Jefferson proper, and to the far
southeast of town, the agrarian hamlet of Frenchman’s Bend. A notable ninth space
of Yoknapatawpha is Memphis, which both conceptually, and in terms of plot,
frequently functions as a repository of Jefferson’s vices. Since the Memphis insets
were re-mapped onto the regional map for this map, their data does not come to full
expression here.

Figure 4. Characters at Events by Race. The following heatmap was created by superimposing four different layers.
All characters who were not Anglo-American, African-American, or Native American, were consolidated into one
“Mixed Ancestry” category. The map very clearly shows how Faulkner conceived of space as racialized.

The map reveals several key points. The first is that space in Yoknapatawpha is
racialized. The events that take place in Frenchman’s Bend to the southeast are
dominated by Anglo-Americans. There are very few non-whites who enter this area,
and as the opening of The Hamlet so forebodingly states, there is not “a negro
landowner in the entire section” and “[s]trange negroes would absolutely refuse to
pass through it after dark.”54 African-Americans stayed away for a good reason.
Meanwhile, the most consistent overlap between African-American and AngloAmericans occurs on the plantations. In some cases, the separation is stark, as with

20

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

the Compson family, there are only African-American and Anglo-American
characters here. Moreover, on the Sartoris plantation there is one mixed ancestry
character, Elnora Strother, whose father is the planter Colonel John Sartoris and
whose mother was an enslaved woman, Euphrony Strother. In other cases, the
segregation between the families is less marked, as evidenced by the McCaslin and
the Sutpen plantations where mixed ancestry characters are far more present. These
areas are also farthest removed from the homogenous area of Frenchman’s Bend. In
fact, the social lines between the races become far blurrier once the panoptic
surveillance of the town of Jefferson is at a greater distance. This is not to suggest
that the Sutpen and McCaslin plantations are sites of racial comity. Instead, the
majority of mixed ancestry characters in these places were conceived through violent
coercion. The only place on the map that is suggestive of racial harmony are the
former lands of Sutpen’s Hundred that are revisited and retraced during the hunting
parties of Go Down, Moses. Here, men from different walks of life come together to
practice the common ritual of the hunt. To all appearances, homosocial spaces
reduced to a state of nature have a profound effect on Faulkner’s treatment of racial
relationships. While it establishes a bond between Sam Fathers and Ike McCaslin in
Go Down, Moses, it lays bare Thomas Sutpen’s subjugation of enslaved Africans in
its most brutal terms. In a recurring scene in Absalom, Absalom! Sutpen is imagined
“stark naked” caked in mud along with twenty Africans he enslaved.55 The societal
decorum that naturalizes one person’s domination over another is not present here.
Another remarkable feature of the map is just how isolated the Native Americans
are. For the majority of the corpus they only appear in one small area to the north of
town, and are slowly encroached upon, until there are more Anglo-American
characters than Native American ones. Finally, it should be noted how devoid the
wider world is of non-white characters, even in places where they are the majority
population.

Animating Characters: Demographic Distribution across
Time
By sequencing the narrative dates and chronological order of all the events, it is
possible to construct an animation of where each type of character occurs across the
narrative time of the corpus (See Video 1: “Racial Distribution by Event
Chronology”).56 Animating the chronology of Yoknapatawpha confirms that the
21

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

racial distribution is the result of consistent patterning on Faulkner’s part. While it
would be inaccurate to say that Faulkner had a total vision, the animation shows that
he was deliberate about who he placed where. The first events of Yoknapatawpha at
the beginning of the nineteenth century, take place concurrently on the Chickasaw
lands and at the McCaslin plantation. This is followed by the creation of Sutpen’s
Hundred in the northwest. Around the time of the Civil War, the Sartoris family
comes into focus. It is not until the turn of the century that events occur at the
Compson place, at the same time Frenchman’s Bend sees more interactions. By the
end of the nineteenth century, the rate of incursions on Native American land also
starts to rise more rapidly. By the early twentieth century, many of the different racial
boundaries have already been established in Yoknapatawpha. From here on, two
important things change: America as an imagined space becomes larger, and the
fantasy of racial purity in Yoknapatawpha starts to collapse. The green mixed
ancestry shading becomes more pronounced in Jefferson, and at Sartoris and
McCaslin throughout the twenties and thirties. Meanwhile, the areas noted on the
national inset become more expansive, with the US stretching from New England to
the Midwest, and occasional events in Texas and California. The world becomes
more global too, with events in Europe, Australia, Asia, the Caribbean, and Mexico.
Of course, any chronological telling of Faulkner’s fiction is an idealized version of
the timeline. It also elides the thematic differences from text to text.
Playing the timeline by publication date demonstrates Faulkner’s creative process
(see Video 2: “Racial Distribution by Publication Date”).57 The publication
animation, working with the exact same data, arrives at the same result but through
different patterns. Faulkner has most of his county established fairly early on, and
even with just Flags in the Dust, the glimmers of the major areas of the fiction
emerge. By Absalom, Absalom! all of the major areas of the map have seen at least
some events. Go Down, Moses in 1942 represents a major inflection point in terms
of the amount of mixed ancestry events across the country, underscoring its
centrality to Faulkner’s treatment of race. The later works revolve largely around
Frenchman’s Bend and the town of Jefferson.
These two animations are a baseline for a more granular analysis of race, family, and
space. Of interest is the intersection of non-white members of major families into
spaces that would otherwise be exclusively white. These spaces can be understood
22

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

as “white spaces” among the general population. For example, in Flags in the Dust,
the African-American coachman for the Sartoris family, Simon Strother, drops off
Jenny Du Pre at the telegraph office. There are no other non-white characters who
appear here throughout the novel, and Simon is there because he is doing work for
his employer.58 Events where a non-white person enters an exclusively white space
by virtue of a family relationship are statistically rare, and in Flags in the Dust this
is the only time such an event takes place.
To render “white spaces among general population” all of the events involving any
of the families were removed, then the locations were subsetted into those where
only white characters appear across the entire text. As these remaining white
characters are not part of a major family, they constitute the general population. Then
the intersection of non-white characters from major families with these white spaces
was calculated, and broken down by the gender. Each feature was scaled based on
the total number of times a non-white character appears within the white spaces over
the course of the narrative (see Figure 5).

Figure 4. Non-white Characters from Major Families in White Spaces. The majority of non-white characters who
travel outside of a domestic setting are men.

To provide a useful point of contrast, a layer with all the instances of non-white
characters not from major families was also created (see Figure 6). This gives

23

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

some indication of where non-white characters go in the county, and also how
frequently non-white characters without a family connection appear in the corpus.

Figure 5. Non-white Characters without Family Connection among General Population. The number of times nonwhite characters not from major families enter “white spaces” is far less frequent.

Combining the layers and iterating it by publication date creates a compelling if
complex animation (see Video 3: “Non-white Characters in White Spaces”).59 The
first notable feature is the ubiquity of white spaces across the corpus. A full 52%
percent of locations only ever feature white characters when characters connected to
major families are removed from the data. To put this in slightly different terms, the
majority of places that characters pass into and out of are exclusively white. Not only
are these white spaces dominant spatially, they are also very numerous across
Faulkner’s career. Over 40% of the stories do not involve a non-white person if they
are not connected to a family. Second, the movement of non-white characters from
non-white families is very much constrained to places around the home of their
enslaver or employer. Thus, while it might be true that certain African-American
characters do have some level of agency, as Davis and Thyssen point out, this agency
does not translate into any real mobility. In the case of women, there is only one
instance of a non-white woman appearing in a “white space” outside of a domestic
scenario: when Molly Worhsam Beauchamp visits the law office of Gavin Stevens
to solicit help for her grandson in Go Down, Moses.60 Among non-white men there

24

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

is more freedom of movement outside of the home, and even some on a national and
global scale. Yet, for them too, entry into white space is highly qualified. The
characters who are able to temporarily transcend racial boundaries are Ringo and
Joby from The Unvanquished, Charles Bon in Absalom, Absalom! and Sam Fathers
in Go Down, Moses. None of these characters could be mistaken for privileged.
Ringo and Joby are both enslaved, and Ringo, an African-American child, is,
implausibly, helping Bayard Sartoris fight the Union during the Civil War. Charles
Bon has more freedom of movement because he is able to pass as white, but is
murdered. Sam Fathers has white, African-American, and Native American roots,
but is viewed as a “negro” in town, and therefore goes to live in the wilderness where
white hunters respect his Native American ancestry. In short, even when non-white
characters with a family connection appear to have marginally more access, this
access is highly restricted. Among non-white characters not from a major family,
space is even more limited, and events are far fewer. In cases where a character
through his or her spatial positioning appears to have some form of agency, the
narrative reality undercuts any possibility of independence. Rider, who moves
around the northeast corner of the map in “Pantaloon in Black,” is haunted by his
wife’s ghost, kills a man, and is lynched. Will Mayes from “Dry September” is also
lynched. The African-American body servant to Issetibbeha who travels at the north
of the map during “Red Leaves” is forced to sacrifice himself. In “Elly,” Paul de
Montigny is killed by his race obsessed lover, Elly, in a car crash. In fact, a full 12%
of non-white men without a family connection meet a violent end.
At first blush, the general contours of these findings contradict the idea that Faulkner,
a moderate white Southerner, was subverting Jim Crow era racial politics through
his highly experimental aesthetics. In essence, the co-occurrence tables and
animations present substantial evidence that a) Faulkner’s world was highly
segregated; b) non-white families who were enslaved by or servants for white
families occur more often than the general population of non-whites; c) these major
non-white families were slightly more mobile spatially because they were able to
enter spaces that would otherwise be exclusively white; d) this effect was stronger
for men. Temporarily, family connection could supersede racial segregation, even if
it likely underscored the asymmetry of the relationship. While not surprising, the
disparity between white and non-white is quite dramatic. Even when non-white
characters are vehicles for underscoring the problem of the system of white
25

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

supremacy, in Faulkner’s world they appear to have little existence outside of family
connections, and when they do, they tend to serve as the victims of spectacular and
voyeuristic violence.

Conclusions to New Beginnings
It is difficult to reconcile these insights with scholarship on race and Faulkner.
Scholars generally accept that Faulkner’s upbringing and the pressures of smalltown Oxford limited the range of opinions he could publicly express about
segregation, while also acknowledging that he had a spotty record of making
reactionary comments about race when afforded the opportunity. Nevertheless, his
writing, in its sheer imaginative richness, appears to treat race with nuance and
complexity. When an aggregate view is taken, this subtlety, by necessity, falls away,
and what is left is a world entirely constructed from the perspective of white society.
There is little room for non-whites generally, and African-American characters
specifically, to exist without being implicated in the South’s racial problem. While
Faulkner uses this perspective to show the inhumanity with which whites treat
others, this, perversely, dehumanizes those very others by granting them no
existence outside of exemplifying white supremacy’s moral degeneracy. More
bluntly, when Faulkner writes about race, it is more often about the anxieties of
whiteness, and not the humanity of African-Americans.
This harsh conclusion is necessarily imperfect, and relies on reading the aggregated
social world as more representative than a few select scenes. This raises significant
philosophical issues about the function of minor characters in fiction. Echoing Alex
Woloch’s work on minor characters, one salient question is whether Faulkner’s
minor characters are part of the social world of Yoknapatawpha, or merely vehicles
that facilitate the plot of the central character? 61 Relatedly, are characters who are
only ever present in an event even part of the plot, or are they merely ornamental?
In order to get a better understanding of how minor characters function in literature,
it would be necessary to establish a comparative baseline with other corpora. Given
the time investment it took to create DY, any similar database for another author is
likely some time away.

26

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Nevertheless, the methodologies deployed in this paper are highly suggestive, and
find patterns between entities that are not possible to understand at a local level, and
hard to capture using other techniques. Crucially, they assume that the organism they
are observing, both human and non-human, are acting with some form of agency.
The same cannot be said for characters in text. They do not share an ontology with
the living world, and do not have agency in a similar sense. They are stuck between
the unknowable intentions of the author, and the idiosyncratic interpretive strategies
of the reader. The character patterns available through the DY database should,
therefore, not be misconstrued as the collection of hopes, desires, and feelings of the
people of Yoknapatawpha, but rather as the grains of sand that sediment Faulkner’s
native soil. Viewed from this perspective, character analysis at scale creates a special
version of the sorites paradox. Each individual character action contributes to the
building of an aggregate demography that is invisible to the builder. It has taken DY
eight years to make this demography searchable and mappable. With phase II of the
project, we will introduce keywords for events, which, hopefully, makes Faulkner’s
world just a little more knowable too.

Acknowledgments
This research and Digital Yoknapatawpha were made possible by a grant from the
National Endowment for the Humanities. The author would like to thank Stephen
Railton, Adam McKible, Robert Jackson, Michael Soto, Brooks Hefner, and Taylor
Conger for looking at initial drafts of this paper. He is also deeply indebted to the
entire DY team who gave continuous feedback and interpretations of the
demographic visualizations as they were under development.

Notes
1

iath.faulkner.virginia.edu

2

The data is available upon request. Please contact: Stephen Railton <sfr@virginia.edu> or Johannes Burgers
<johannes.burgers@ashoka.edu.in> for more information.
3

This essay was composed using a data grab from October, 2019. Since then, there have been minor updates to
character, location, and event entries being used for analysis.
4

For a good overview of recent work that has been done see: Niels Dekker, Tobias Kuhn, and Marieke van Erp,
“Evaluating Named Entity Recognition Tools for Extracting Social Networks from Novels,” PeerJ Computer
Science 5 (2019). There have been various approaches to extracting character entities from literary fiction. A

27

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

particularly powerful one is that of Bamman, Underwood, and Smith who use a Bayesian mixed effects model to
detect latent character types while also accounting for differences in authorial style, David Bamman, Ted
Underwood, and Noah A. Smith. 2014. “A Bayesian Mixed Effects Model of Literary Character.” (In 52nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Baltimore, MA, June 2014). Baltimore, MA: Association
for Computational Linguistics. Meanwhile, John Markus et al., developed a tool that uses a combination of
sentiment analysis and social network mapping with which users can explore character relationships across a
narrative, Markus John et al. 2019. “A Visual Approach for the Comparative Analysis of Character Networks in
Narrative Texts.” (paper presented at the IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium, Bangkok, Thailand, 23-26 April
2019), 10.1109/PacificVis.2019.00037. In a similar vein, Fischer et al., are working on a model to show the
relationship between character networks and plot, Frank Fischer et al. 2017. “Network Dynamics, Plot Analysis:
Approaching the Progressive Structuration of Literary Texts.” (In Digital Humanities 2017, Montréal, 8-11 August).
Montréal: McGill University. In the fifth chapter of his work, Enumerations, Andrew Piper deploys a multipronged
character analysis approach to demonstrate, among other things, that female characters written by women in the
early nineteenth century, have a higher tendency towards interiority and reflection, a feature of characterization that
is appropriated by male authors writing about male characters in the twentieth century. Andrew Piper,
Enumerations: Data and Literary Study (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2018), 118-46. For work on
conversational-networks see: David K. Elson and Kathleen R. McKeown. 2010. “Automatic Attribution of Quoted
Speech in Literary Narrative.” (In Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Atlanta, July 2010).
Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence; Nathanael Chambers and Dan Jurafsky. 2008.
“Unsupervised Learning of Narrative Event Chains.” (In Proceedings of the 46th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, Columbus, OH, 2008). Association for Computational Linguistics; Hua He, Denilson
Barbosa, and Grzegorz Kondrak. 2013. “Identification of Speakers in Novels.” (In Proceedings of the 51st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2013). Association for Computational
Linguistics. Work on co-occurrence networks has been done by: Matt Fernandez, Michael Peterson, and Ben Ulmer,
“Extracting Social Network from Literature to Predict Antagonist and Protagonist,” Technical Report (2015);
Mariona Coll Ardanuy and Caroline Sporleder. 2014. “Structure-based Clustering of Novels.” (In Proceedings of the
3rd Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Literature (CLFL), Gothenburg, Sweden. Sweden Association for
Computational Linguistics.
5

There have been a number of studies related to the representation of character gender in fiction. Jonathan Cheng’s
recent contribution gives a good overview of what is possible, and also what remains elusive. In particular, current
parsers cannot pick up on the gender of generic nouns. Jonathan Cheng, “Fleshing Out Models of Gender in
English-Language Novels (1850 – 2000),” Journal of Cultural Analytics (2020). There have been attempts in other
disciplines to gather demographic data through NLP techniques, but the unstructured data sets need to be
complemented by either structured demographic data or explicitly defined communication networks. See for
example: Jane R. Grafton et al., “Identifying Race/Ethnicity Data via Natural Language Processing among Women
in a Uterine Fibroid Cohort Study,” Journal of Patient-Centered Research and Reviews 3, no. 3 (2016); M.
Saravanan, “Determining Ethnicity of Immigrants using Twitter Data,” in Proceedings of the 4th Multidisciplinary
International Social Networks Conference (Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computing Machinery, 2017); Adi
V. Gundlapalli et al., “Combining Natural Language Processing of Electronic Medical Notes with Administrative
Data to Determine Racial/Ethnic Differences in the Disclosure and Documentation of Military Sexual Trauma in
Veterans,” Medical Care 57 (2019).
6

Piper, Enumerations: Data and Literary Study, 121.

7

Theresa M. Towner, Faulkner on the Color Line: The Later Novels (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi,
2000), 9.
8

John N. Duvall, Race and White Identity in Southern Fiction: From Faulkner to Morrison (New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2008), 60. Michael Wainwright, Darwin and Faulkner’s Novels: Evolution and Southern Fiction (New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), 19-21. Dorothy Stringer, “Not even Past”: Race, Historical Trauma, and
Subjectivity in Faulkner, Larsen, and Van Vechten (New York: Fordham University Press, 2010), 39. Leigh Ann
Duck, “The World of Jim Crow,” in William Faulkner in Context, ed. John T. Matthews (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2015), 139-40. Keith Cartwright, “What Was Africa to Faulkner?,” ibid., 59. Kristin Fujie,
“‘Through a Piece of Colored Glass’: Faulkner, Race, and Mediation,” Modern Fiction Studies 65, no. 3 (2019):
413.

28

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

9

Noel Polk, “Man in the Middle: Faulkner and the Southern White Moderate,” in Faulkner and Race, ed. Doreen
Fowler and Ann J. Abadie (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1987), 142.
10

Thadious M. Davis, Games of Property: Law, Race, Gender, and Faulkner’s Go down, Moses (Durham: Duke
University Press, 2003), 7-8.
11

Duvall, Race and White Identity in Southern Fiction: From Faulkner to Morrison, 60-61.
Christina Thyssen, “‘Ah kin pass wid anything’: Blackness as Figural Excess in Faulkner’s Go Down, Moses,”
Faulkner Journal 29, no. 2 (2015): 106.
12

13

Don Harrison Doyle, Faulkner’s County: The Historical Roots of Yoknapatawpha (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 2001), 303.
14
Stephen Railton and Christopher Rieger, “Faulkner Mapping|Mapping Faulkner,” University of Virginia,
http://faulkner.iath.virginia.edu/media/resources/DISPLAYS/FaulknerMapsHP.html.
15

This includes characters whose racial identity is unknown, even to themselves like Joe Christmas in Light in
August.
16

William Faulkner, Requiem for a Nun (New York: Vintage Books, 2011), 169-73. Absalom, Absalom! (New
York: Vintage International, 1990), 41.
17

Piper, Enumerations: Data and Literary Study, 122.

18

For a more general overview of the data limits and possibilities see Johannes Burgers, “Yoknapatawpha at 30,000
Feet: Locations, Characters, and Events in the DY Database,” in From Yoknapatawpha to the Virtual World: The
Shape of Faulkner’s Digital County, ed. Theresa M. Towner (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press,
Forthcoming).
19

Stephen Railton. “Instructions.” Digital Yoknapatawpha, University of Virginia.
http://faulkner.drupal.shanti.virginia.edu/content/instructions-0
20

Jay Watson, “Introduction: Situating Whiteness in Faulkner Studies, Situating Faulkner in Whiteness Studies,” in
Faulkner and Whiteness, ed. Jay Watson (Jackson: University press of Mississippi, 2011), viii - ix.
21

William Faulkner, “Spotted Horses,” in Uncollected Stories (New York: Vintage, 1997), 166.

22

Sanctuary: The Corrected Text (New York: Vintage Books, 1987), 180.

23

“A Name for a City,” Harper’s Magazine, October 1950, 201.

24

“Lion,” 192.

25

Railton and Rieger, “Faulkner Mapping|Mapping Faulkner”.

26

David J. Bodenhamer, “Making the Invisible Visible: Place, Spatial Theories, and Deep Maps,” in Literary
Mapping in the Digital Age, ed. David Cooper, Christopher Donaldson, and Patricia Murrieta-Flores (New York:
Routledge, 2016), 212; Anne-Kathrin Reuschel and Lorenz Hurni, “Mapping Literature: Visualisation of Spatial
Uncertainty in Fiction,” The Cartographic Journal 48, no. 4 (2011): 294-95.
27

Raphael Alvarado, “Characters and Locations in Force Directed Graph,”
http://faulkner.iath.virginia.edu/characters-force.html?text_na=FD.
28

John et al., “A Visual Approach for the Comparative Analysis of Character Networks in Narrative Texts,” 247-48.

29

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

29

Joseph A. Veech, “A Probabilistic Model for Analysing Species Co-Occurrence,” Global Ecology and
Biogeography 22, no. 2 (2013): 252.
30

Ibid., 254.

31

Daniel Griffith, Joseph Veech, and Charles Marsh, “cooccur: Probabilistic Species Co-Occurrence Analysis in R,”
Journal of Statistical Software 69 (2016).
32

Veech, “A Probabilistic Model for Analysing Species Co-Occurrence,” 252.

33

Doyle, Faulkner’s County: The Historical Roots of Yoknapatawpha, 106-08.

34

Wainwright, Darwin and Faulkner’s Novels: Evolution and Southern Fiction, 103.

35

Richard H. King, A Southern Renaissance: The Cultural Awakening of the American South, 1930-1955 (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1980), 27; Valérie Loichot, Orphan Narratives: The Postplantation Literature of
Faulkner, Glissant, Morrison, and Saint-John Perse (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2007), 15-16.
36

Watson, “Genealogies of White Deviance: The Eugenic Family Studies, Buck v. Bell,
and William Faulkner, 1926–1931.” Jay Watson makes the compelling argument that the growing eugenics
movement also spurred an interest in genealogy and family history. This likely had an effect on Faulkner’s early
novels.
37

Mary Paniccia Carden, “Fatherless Children and Post-Patrilineal Futures in William Faulkner’s Light in August,
Absalom, Absalom!, and Go Down, Moses,” The Faulkner Journal 27 (2013): 72-73; Heidi Kathleen Kim, “The
Foreigner in Yoknapatawpha: Rethinking Race in Faulkner’s ‘Global South’,” Philological Quarterly 90, no. 2/3
(2011): 201; Jenna Sciuto, “’For Fear of a Scandal’: Sexual Policing and the Preservation of Colonial Relations in
William Faulkner and Marie Vieux-Chauvet,” in Faulkner and the Black Literatures of the Americas, ed. Jay
Watson and James G. Thomas (University Press of Mississippi, 2016), 185-87.
38

For the purposes of this paper, the Bundren and De Spain characters have also been coded with their family
designation. These characters were already in the database, but had not been identified by family yet.
39

All analysis going forward relies on a P-value of .05 or less to test whether two characters co-occur positively or
negatively.
40

The controlled vocabularies evolved over the course of the project, and with each expansion of the terms list
retroactive revisions were made to character attributes. Not all the terms that were created were utilized regularly.
This is especially true in the case of “Yeoman,” a distinction used by an older generation of Faulkner scholars to
describe simple landholding farmers, Cleanth Brooks, William Faulkner: The Yoknapatawpha Country (Baton
Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 1991), 10-28. Across the database Yeoman is only used to describe 28
out of 4,659 characters, and they only occur in 84 events. Their occurrence is so sparse that they were folded into
lower class. A critic like Brooks might bristle at this move, because he saw them as a separate class, but in the
context of DY they are spatially and economically similar to their other country folks. In a similarly reductive move,
Indian Tribal Chief and Indian Tribal Leader all became Indian Tribal Members. There are five Asian characters in
the corpus, but their appearance is so fractional that they do not register in any of the analysis. Finally, as stated
earlier, all events with multiracial, multiclass, and multigender groups were removed, because these undifferentiated
groups fundamentally change the context of an event that could affect co-occurrence analysis. As there is no way to
ascertain the magnitude of the effect since groups are non-countable, the more conservative approach is to leave
them out entirely.
41

One reason not all combinations are possible is because the database divides class into three categories based on
race, as discussed earlier.
42

William Faulkner, Light in August: The Corrected Text (New York: Vintage Books, 1987), 471.

30

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

43

Kevin Railey, Natural Aristocracy: History, Ideology, and the Production of William Faulkner (Tuscaloosa:
University of Alabama Press, 1999), 7-8.
44

Micki McElya, Clinging to Mammy: The Faithful Slave in Twentieth-Century America (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 2007), 13; Duvall, Race and White Identity in Southern Fiction: From Faulkner to Morrison, 51.
45

Rebecca Sharpless, Cooking in Other Women’s Kitchens: Domestic Workers in the South, 1865-1960 (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2010), 110.
46

Railey, Natural Aristocracy: History, Ideology, and the Production of William Faulkner, 137-41.

47

Malcolm Cowley, The Faulkner-Cowley File; Letters and Memories, 1944-1962 (New York: Viking Press, 1966),
389.
48

This appears to confirm Melanie Benson Taylor’s thesis that while Native Americans are conspicuously absent
from the more central history of Yoknapatawpha, they are an uncanny presence throughout the saga, Melanie
Benson Taylor, “Doom and Deliverance: Faulkner’s Dialectical Indians,” in Faulkner and the Native South
(University Press of Mississippi, 2019).
49

This included all the short stories and novels such as As I Lay Dying and The Mansion, which are about relatively
homogenous white communities with very few non-white characters. Curiously, it also included The Unvanquished,
a novel about Bayard an upper class white male, and Ringo his enslaved companion. This had many co-occurrences
between African-American and Anglo-American characters. As there are only four character types in the novel, the
number of times they co-occur is virtually the same as would be expected at random. Consequently, there are simply
not enough character types to make a meaningful differentiation. The result is clearly counterintuitive, and suggests
that this co-occurrence methodology for fiction works well across the corpus, but produces contradictory results for
novels and short stories.
50

Interestingly, Boon, who is not a family member, appears in the intra-familial results because he is usually present
when Lucius and Ned are.
51

Angelina Grigoryeva and Martin Ruef, “The Historical Demography of Racial Segregation,” American
Sociological Review 80, no. 4 (2015): 815.
52

Aliya Saperstein and Aaron Gullickson, “A ‘Mulatto Escape Hatch’ in the United States? Examining Evidence of
Racial and Social Mobility During the Jim Crow Era,” Demography 50, no. 5 (2013): 1935.
53

Johannes Burgers, John Corrigan, and James Carothers. “Faulkner's The Hamlet." Digital Yoknapatawpha,
University of Virginia, http://faulkner.iath.virginia.edu/index.html?text=H. Stephen Railton, Ben Robbins, and
Theresa M. Towner. "Faulkner's Sanctuary." Digital Yoknapatawpha, University of
Virginia, http://faulkner.iath.virginia.edu/index.html?text=SY. See the individual stories for the insets.
54

William Faulkner, The Hamlet: The Corrected Text (New York: Vintage Books, 1991), 5.

55

Absalom, Absalom!: The Corrected Text (New York: Vintage Books, 1990), 20.

56

Johannes Burgers. “Racial Distribution by Event Chronology.” Digital Yoknapatawpha, University of Virginia.
http://faulkner.iath.virginia.edu/demo/Racial_Distribution_by_Event_Chronology1.mp4.
57

“Racial Distribution by Publication Date.” ibid.
http://faulkner.iath.virginia.edu/demo/Racial_Distribution_by_Publication_Date1.mp4.
58

Flags in the Dust (New York: Vintage International, 2012), 391-92.

59

Johannes Burgers. “Non-white Characters in White Spaces,” Digital Yoknapatawpha, University of Virginia.
http://faulkner.iath.virginia.edu/demo/Major_Families_General_Population_White_Space.mp4.

31

FAMILIAL PLACES IN JIM CROW SPACES

60

Go Down, Moses (New York: Vintage Books, 1990), 352; “Go Down, Moses,” 257.

61

Alex Woloch, The One vs. the Many: Minor Characters and the Space of the Protagonist in the Novel (Princeton
University Press, 2009), 14.

32

