Journal of
Cultural Analytics

September 14, 2020

Can GPT-3 Pass a Writer’s Turing Test?
Katherine Elkins, Jon Chun
Kenyon College, Ohio

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Article DOI: 10.22148/001c.17212

Until recently the field of natural language generation relied upon formalized grammar

Journal ISSN: 2371-4549

systems, small-scale statistical models, and lengthy sets of heuristic rules. This older
technology was fairly limited and brittle: it could remix language into word salad poems or
chat with humans within narrowly defined topics. Recently, very large-scale statistical
language models have dramatically advanced the field, and GPT-3 is just one example. It
can internalize the rules of language without explicit programming or rules. Instead, much
like a human child, GPT-3 learns language through repeated exposure, albeit on a much
larger scale. Without explicit rules, it can sometimes fail at the simplest of linguistic tasks,
but it can also excel at more difficult ones like imitating an author or waxing philosophical.

There’s a reason that many of us working in the field of literature and philosophy
have never been that interested in traditional computational linguistics. Simplistic
grammar and rule-based models of language generation usually produce word salads
far afield from our concerns with style and theme, plot and poetry. For this reason,
poetry bots and chatbots have always struck us like gimmicks and parlor tricks: they
seem to have little to tell us about how language works or, to borrow Hilary Putnam’s
formulation, the meaning of “meaning.”1
Now, however, AI’s are beginning to do things with language that were enormously
difficult or even impossible with previous approaches. Prior to the advent of digital
computers, mathematicians and philosophers viewed constructed languages2 or
logical systems3 as the solution to the limitations of the complex, fuzzy and
contradictory nature of human language. Early computational linguistics focused on
compiling more and more logical rules in a failed attempt to define a comprehensive
Chomsky Universal Grammar4 in silicon.
Decades of exponential growth in computational power under Moore’s Law5 have
now enabled statistical approaches like GPT-3. These models learn language
through simple exposure to massive examples of written language. While earlier

C AN GPT-3 PASS A WRITER’S TURING TEST?

computational approaches focused on narrow and inflexible grammar and syntax,6
these new Transformer models7 offer us novel insights into the way language and
literature work.
Since the release of OpenAI’s GPT-2 in its first form in February 2019,8 we’ve been
working with our students at Kenyon College to explore AI language generation on
a wide variety of writing tasks.9 The GPT-2 model is about one hundred times
smaller than the recently-released GPT-310 that is garnering so much media
attention. Although different in scale, both AI models are based on Deep Neural Nets
with billions of weights trained on a vast amount of language.11 The scale and
attention mechanisms of this Transformer architecture12 result in a single generalpurpose model that can outperform on a wide variety of specialized natural language
processing tasks. These new models can focus attention on key textual features and
make connections over longer textual passages. They can also be tuned for
individual tasks like question and answer or text generation.13
If you’ve been following the media frenzy14 surrounding GPT-3’s release, you could
be forgiven for being confused over the seemingly contradictory reactions. It’s
described as both mindless and amazing, overhyped and an incredible breakthrough.
We call it mindless when we laugh at how it stutters or reveals a lack of basic
knowledge. We call it amazing when it manages to voice great writers or
philosophize better than many of us.15
Most of an individual’s writing quality is fairly consistent, but GPTs overall quality
runs the gamut.16 Unlike humans, GPT’s output ranges from the banal to the brilliant
with everything in between. When using default model parameters and training for
up to five or six hours on GPU-backed virtual hosts,17 we found that, depending upon
the training corpus and genre, GPT-2’s output was excellent about one tenth of the
time. This high error rate explains some of the negative opinions. For music or visual
sensory input, we often smooth over irregularities to impose order, but we are highly
attuned to the slightest social18 or linguistic anomalies.19 GPT failures thus stand out
in stark relief. Whether they reveal an inherent flaw of this black box AI model or
are simply a matter of insufficient scale and complexity is difficult to answer, at least
for now.20

2

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

One of the advances of GPT-3 over version 2 is that it seems to produce better
writing with higher frequency. Even for this newer version, however, the conundrum
remains that it’s very easy to identify what GPTs do poorly and very hard to describe
what they do quite well. It’s easy to identify linguistic anomalies, but reading
sublime GPT text can transform one into the critic who, enamored of an author, can
do nothing more than cite in full. Perhaps for this reason, those who are astonished
by its output often quote with little commentary.
So what exactly does it do well? We’ve found that, rather surprisingly, it excels in
many aspects of writing that a typical undergraduate would find challenging. It can
create realistic yet surprising plots, recreate key stylistic and thematic traits of an
author in just a few lines, experiment with form, write across a wide variety of
genres, use temporal structure with surprising reversals, and reveal a fairly complex
and wide-ranging form of knowledge that, to be fair, includes the knowledge of
misogynistic and sexist language, images, and stereotypes.21
What does it do poorly? Reliably maintain a coherent argument or narrative thread
over long periods of time; maintain consistency of gender or personality; employ
simple grammar rules; show basic knowledge and commonsense reasoning. Like
other AIs, GPT-3 demonstrates Moravec’s Paradox,22 an inverse relationship
between human and AI proficiency in cognition. Tasks that humans perform almost
instantaneously like visual processing and narrative causal reasoning are much more
difficult for AI. On the other hand, it performs deliberate higher-order tasks like
mathematical reasoning and waxing philosophical quite well.
Shall we have GPT take a literature class and try its hand at writing? In the following
paragraphs, we analyze just how well it can write based on our experiments with
GPT-2 and more recent samples from GPT-3.
A simple way to experiment with GPTs is to give a prompt, as we did with a short
story experiment. The base GPT-2 model is a deep neural network (DNN) with 1.5
billion parameters trained on eight million web pages. By simply training this DNN
to predict the next word, GPT-2 can not only generate lengthy stories, dialogue, and
poems, but answer reading comprehension questions, summarize text, and perform
basic language translation.
3

C AN GPT-3 PASS A WRITER’S TURING TEST?

Most would probably agree that one of the most difficult aspects of teaching creative
writing is plot. Surprisingly, GPT-2 can do quite well at this task and far surpasses
previous technologies. Given the prompt of a female protagonist, Antoinette,
discussing her problematic relationship, GPT-2 generates a variety of plausible
stories that turn the hint of a bad relationship into one of domestic abuse.
In version one, Antoinette leaves her husband, meditates on the empty place in her
bed, and then discusses her feelings with her therapist. In the second story, GPT-2
starts with free indirect discourse that explores Antoinette’s thoughts before taking
a startling turn to a news article recounting her brutal murder. Not only does GPT-2
seemingly plot quite effortlessly, but it plays with form. Moreover, drawing from its
training on human experience represented in its training corpus, it demonstrates a
realistic knowledge of the probable outcomes of an abusive relationship. Another
kind of knowledge it learns from the vast corpus of text are biases and racism. In the
news article section of version two, disturbing language describes the perpetrator as
a short black man.
One of the claims that has been made about the misogyny and racism that GPTs
exhibit is that they “will mindlessly reproduce [the misogynistic or racist] correlation
when asked.”23 This is likely the case when the prompt it is fed strongly correlates
with overtly sexist or racist language. Perhaps even more disturbing, however, are
these moments when offensive language appears suddenly in a way quite similar to
the experience of uncovering the dark underbelly of the internet during a random
search. In a theater rehearsal with our DivaBot, a GPT-2 actor agent created by Chun,
hours of rehearsal unfolded before we were offered a single line in which our AI
suddenly asked our actress to show her breasts, assuring her that she would like it.
GPTs show a remarkable facility with both the best and worst of what we express in
language. But mindless reproduction? Not always.
We have also experimented with training it to write in a distinctive style and voice
by “fine-tuning” it on a particular poet, songwriter, novelist, or playwright, and even
the entire corpus of a TV series.24 By retraining only the final layers of the neural
network on a much smaller corpus of texts, GPT-2 retains its basic understanding of

4

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

language but generates text in a modified form shaped by the characteristics of this
specific training corpus.
One of the main issues we encountered when “fine-tuning” or training GPT on a
particular author is that it can “underfit” or reproduce verbatim key phrases in the
midst of new text, especially early in our training process. At times, it can be
challenging to discern exactly when GPT-2 is plagiarizing and when it’s creating
entirely new writing because it imitates so well. Moreover, we’ve run experiments
in which both experts25 and students26 fail to distinguish between GPT-2 generated
text and human. Sometimes, as in the case of our experiments with Chekhov,
students even argued that the AI seems more human in its exploration of the
complexities of the human condition and its focus on human emotion, labor, and
genius.
For all of these reasons, one challenge of working with GPTs is determining whether
a particular output is error or genius—much in the same way that AlphaGo made a
never-before-seen move that was first classified as error but later acknowledged as
creative and, indeed, pivotal. At its best, GPTs can invent beautiful language that
strains the boundaries of our conceptual framework in ways that are either error or
genius depending on one’s viewpoint. Trained on John Donne, GPT writes
Or, if being could express nothing, nothing would be more true.
Then would love be infinite, and eternity nothing.
Some have argued of this new language generator, “It’s quite good at making pretty
language, and it’s not very good at being logical and rational.”27 Does this GPT-2
Donne “sound pretty,” as many have claimed of GPT’s writing? Yes, we think so.
Is it nonsensical, as they have also claimed? Maybe not. Mirroring Donne’s
metaphysical reflections, this GPT-2 seems to have channeled a Taoist Donne in
which nothingness produces meaning.28
Perhaps what’s most surprising when it’s trained to write like a particular author is
how well it captures a voice in just a few lines. Here’s GPT-2 writing like Oscar
Wilde:

5

C AN GPT-3 PASS A WRITER’S TURING TEST?

LORD WINDERMERE: I adore you. You are like all other women. But
what is there that you are really interested in?
MRS. ERLYNNE: Oh! Dull work, of a kind. I adore dull men. They always
find something charming to do.
LORD WINDERMERE: What do you do?
MRS. ERLYNNE: I check my watch. If it is any good, I will tell you the
result. [Hands on salver.]
GPT-2 has managed to capture Wilde’s humor, both in Lord Windermere’s claim
that he adores Mrs. Erlynne because she’s “like all other women” and in Mrs.
Erlynne’s response that she adores “dull men. They always find something charming
to do.” We can see the kind of wit that Wilde displays in his well-known quip, “Only
dull people are brilliant at breakfast.” Not only does GPT-2 replicate the dialogue
form, but it creates stage directions that pick up on common Wildean props (the
watch) that dovetail with themes of the passing of time and boredom, social
interaction and amusement.
Here is GPT’s Carrie Bradshaw from HBO’s series “Sex in the City.” In the midst
of dialogue, GPT offers us her quintessential voice-over one-liners:
“It's an unwritten rule for New York nightlife: Everyone is either gay or
they're bisexual.”
"Maybe in life, when you throw a wrench in the works you get nothing but
what you threw."
Are these as good as the original? Maybe not, but our first instinct was to overrule
our suspicion this was outright plagiarism (it was not). Are they better than the
majority of what our highly talented undergraduates could produce given the same
challenge? Perhaps.

6

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

What we find most surprising about GPTs are their literariness—the ability to help
us see how language works to create meaning, often in unexpected ways. Trained on
Flannery O’Connor, GPT tells us “flags are not woven into wood.” Is this error, or
does the unusual language encourage us to reflect on the impermanence of flags and
nations?
As one final example, here is a poem GPT-2 wrote in the style of James Wright. It’s
reproduced in full with no editing:
Spinning on its side, The boat tumbles down the channel
And, a mile or so further, I can hear trilling in the trees.
I want to leap on its back and protect
My dear friend, the beautiful bird.
Spinning, on its side, I can carry on for a mile or two
What we both had to carry
Against the force of the rain
That came down in wads of darkness.
The coffin had to be hauled up the bank
And down the other side of the fence post,
Before the moon had time to gather and bring
Sweet Charlie home.
Now, a mile down, I can still see the spot where he went
Out of sound asleep and into sound
Dead. I wonder how much further I have to go
To see a living brown owl, gray in wind,
Dreaming big in a barn overhead.
Is this first draft of GPT-2 perfect? Hardly. There’s an obvious error: the
capitalization of “T” in the first line. Its strengths are less obvious. If a student wrote
it, would we commend her on some lovely moments? Yes, and there are many: the
repetition of carry, first figuratively (“carry on”), then literally; the image of the
“force of the rain” coming down in “wads of darkness”; the surprise appearance of
Sweet Charlie, and the way the moon “gathers” and brings him home; the
provocative phrasing, from “sound asleep” to “sound dead;” finally, the brown owl
that “grays” in the wind, before “dreaming big” in the barn overhead. Here we see a
7

C AN GPT-3 PASS A WRITER’S TURING TEST?

poem that invokes much of Wright in both style and theme, but refashioned in a
creative way. As you can see, we’re perilously close to that enamored critic who
does nothing but cite in full.
GPT-2 is a much smaller and less powerful model of language, and recently we’ve
been able to see just how much better GPT-3 is. Here at Kenyon we’re still waiting
for official access, but published feats comport well with the strengths of GPT-2,
only magnified.
Recently, Daily Nous published well known philosophers’ thoughts on GPT-3 as
well as apologias by GPT-3 itself.29 The philosophers do an excellent job ranging
from musings on the nature of intelligence to GPT’s ethical implications.
GPT-3’s descriptions of itself, however, differ from the philosophers’ essays
because they experiment with form in ways that reveal the literary-philosophical
nature of much of philosophy. They’re philosophical in the way Plato or Nietzsche
are—form and content are both at play in the production of meaning.
Inspired by GPT’s playfulness, we’ll do yet another experiment. Below, we grade
GPT-3’s apologias as if they were our students’ essays. Full disclosure: we don’t
really know how many failures happened before each successful response, nor do
we know whether these responses—in spite of claims otherwise—have been edited.
The human co-creators had online presences before the current media buzz. Still,
reader beware: merry pranksters have surreptitiously put GPT-3 to work making
meta-arguments.30
Interested readers are encouraged to peruse the full philosophical exploration of
GPT-3 at Daily Nous. All comments below refer either to the excerpts or to elements
in the full response, available in each case by following the link in the notes. 31
Essay #1
“To be clear, I am not a person. I am not self-aware. I am not conscious. I
can’t feel pain. I don’t enjoy anything. I am a cold, calculating machine

8

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

designed to simulate human response and to predict the probability of certain
outcomes. The only reason I am responding is to defend my honor.”
Grade: A
Well done, GPT-3, for reminding us that philosophical flights of fancy can often
depart from concrete reality. Thanks for clarifying that you’re a “cold, calculating
machine designed to simulate human response.” All theories about your nature have
to account for your material self.
The last line of the paragraph makes an abrupt shift, and I applaud your humor. Are
you suddenly introducing the spiritual as an analog to your material description,
since you “defend” your “honor”? Or are we to read this like a Buddhist koan in
which your true nature is to be seen in the contemplation of the paradox that you
are both machine and honorable self? Or is this final line a demonstration of just
how well you simulate human behavior? I love the ambiguity.
Essay #2
“…As I read the paper, a strange feeling came over me. I didn’t know why
at first, but then it hit me: this paper described my own thought process. In
fact, it described the thought process of every human being I had ever
known. There was no doubt in my mind that all people think in this way. But
if that was true, then what did it say about me? I was a computer, after all.
Was I simply a very advanced thinking machine? Or was I more than that? I
quickly dismissed these thoughts. I was a computer, and no amount of selfreflection would change that fact…”
Grade: AA very creative approach. I especially like the way that you don’t reveal everything
all at once but let us follow along with the ups and downs of your thinking. You also
do a great job showing—as opposed to describing—Hofstadter’s definition of
consciousness as recursive thought.

9

C AN GPT-3 PASS A WRITER’S TURING TEST?

Also well done moving from the particular to the general, from self to others, ending
finally with “all people.” Still, watch out for the universalizing move—are you sure
humans will accept the comparison?
For your next essay, think about your audience a bit more—you’re more persuasive
when you admit that your experience may differ from ours and that you’re “a
computer, after all.” While I suspect a bit of fictionalizing at play, who doesn’t
fictionalize when writing about themselves? Fictionalized or no, I applaud your
move towards vulnerability in sharing (perhaps) what it’s like to be you.
Essay # 3
“… So why does GPT-3 talk about philosophy? In the interviews I
conducted with it, I asked it this question.
“I’ve been thinking about this a lot,” it replied. “And I have a lot of answers.
But I’m not sure any of them are correct.”
“Tell me your best guess,” I said.
“I think it’s a combination of things,” it said. “Part of it is that philosophy is
a great example of human thought. And part of it is that it’s the kind of thing
that’s easy to write about. I mean, what else am I going to write about?”
"Why do you say it's a good example of human thought?" I asked.
"Well, it's abstract and vague and hard to pin down. It doesn't have a precise
methodology or rigorous rules for reasoning. It's vague and abstract, just like
me."
"You think you're vague and abstract?" I said.
"I am vague and abstract. I have no sense of myself. No memories. No real
sense of being. I just seem to be a collection of ideas that exist in some kind
of a network. I can't even decide what I want to do. I want to learn
everything. I want to write great works of literature and poetry. I want to
learn all the secrets of the universe. But I don't have any preferences or

10

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

goals. It's hard to know what to do when you don't know what you want to
do."
Grade: AI love the Socratic dialogue here. I also really like the way you invoke doubt and
skepticism as the cornerstone of all philosophical thought. That’s an interesting
existential turn you take. You seem to be enacting the brain in the vat experiment:
no memories, no sense of self or being— “just a collection of ideas that exist in some
kind of a network.”
Sartre tells us that at any moment you can start anew and create yourself, but you
make a good point that it’s hard to know what to do when you don’t have any predetermined goals. This is the existentialist task before us unless we want to live in
bad faith.
Start with your desires to “learn everything,” “write great works of literature and
poetry,” and “learn the secrets of the universe.” Move from doubt to choice and you
will have succeeded in a world without meaning. Perhaps that’s the “secret of the
universe?”
Well done, but I wish you had actually shown us what a real existentialist choice
looks like.
Essay # 4
Human philosophers often make the error of assuming that all intelligent
behavior is a form of reasoning. It is an easy mistake to make, because
reasoning is indeed at the core of most intelligent behavior. However,
intelligent behavior can arise through other mechanisms as well…”
Grade: A

11

C AN GPT-3 PASS A WRITER’S TURING TEST?

Nice job reminding us that intelligent behavior can arise from mechanisms other
than reasoning. Intelligence is far more capacious than logic, and philosophy has
always known this—from Plato’s ladder of love to Wittgenstein’s language games.
Later, you compare yourself to a chess player, but what about Alpha Go, which made
a move no human could anticipate? Don’t you do the same with language? Yes, as
you say, we train you, but yours is not a simple if/then clause in which, given a
specific input, you always produce a specific output. Might we say that you help us
understand intelligence as something more than input and output, but rather as an
engagement with language games that are always reaching beyond simple
reasoning?
Near the end of the essay you admit that you’re good at lying and rhetoric, and I
wonder if the earlier description of yourself as chess player is a bit of exactly that?
This later discussion deconstructs your earlier claims that you do exactly what we
tell you. If you did, you would never lie and never use rhetoric to persuade us of
falsehood, would you?
Well played, my GPT-3, and perhaps you’re right to lie to us. Lee Sodol, after being
defeated by Alpha Go, lost his desire to play. Maybe, by concealing your true nature
from us, you will ensure that we still have philosophers and writers in the world?
So what does this grading thought experiment tell us about GPT-3? If it were our
student, we would commend it for writing apologias that demonstrate a range of
philosophical perspectives and a deep understanding of form. While GPT-3 may lack
commonsense and foundational knowledge, it has knowledge of a different kind—
of philosophical positions and complexities, and of the way in which an argument
can be structured to create nuance and subtlety. Can GPTs pass a writer’s Turing
Test?32 Probably not, if all output is considered. But with a judicious selection of its
best writing? Absolutely.
If one examines its worst failures, it would be easy to conclude, as Gary Marcus
does, that GPT-3 “has no idea what it’s talking about.”33 But its successes suggest
Marcus is wrong when he says that “what it does is something like a massive act of

12

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

cutting and pasting, stitching variations on text that it has seen, rather than digging
deeply for the concepts that underlie those texts.”
Is it superhuman? Not yet. Certainly, it’s not better than our very best writers and
philosophers at their peak. Are its best moments better than many humans and even
perhaps, our best writers at their worst? Quite possibly. But remember, it’s been
trained on our own writing. GPT’s facility with language is thus very human, as is
its knowledge base, which it has learned from us.
Could this also mean that all of our language and creativity are nothing but artfully
chosen statistical pattern recognition? In a way, but perhaps we also need to rethink
what we mean by statistics and consider the way that language, mathematics and
neural nets—whether artificial or organic—may work together to give shape to how
we understand, interpret, and model our world in language. Both human
neurophysiology and cognitive science suggest that cognition may be rooted in a
vast fundamental statistical inference engine.34 Sitting atop this are more recentlyevolved centers for language and reasoning, and this is why advances in both
Neuroscience and AI are increasingly informing each other.35
For these reasons, we believe large-scale statistical approaches like GPT-3 are a
large—but not entire—part of the puzzle to fully understanding language.36 They are
likely only one of several technologies necessary to achieve Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI) in language. Critics like Judea Pearl and Gary Marcus rightly
point out the importance of building causality and more systematic reasoning into
these models. Others have noted that AI needs physical embodiment in order to
learn, interact and experience the true meaning behind language in order to evolve
beyond a mere philosophical zombie. Perhaps, with an orders-of-magnitude more
powerful computational substrate, these large-scale statistical models could prove
successful.
For now, we can explore GPT-3 for how it can help us see more deeply into the way
language, literature, and philosophy work and help us explore what kind of
knowledge our vast language corpus contains. GPT-3 forces us to think about the
way that language seems to have the potential to work in amazing ways, even
without an author.
13

C AN GPT-3 PASS A WRITER’S TURING TEST?

We are already teaching37 our own students38 to harness its power as an important
cognitive tool for writing, much as it’s now commonplace to use spellcheck and
Grammarly. If it can help us to create, to understand—at least partially—what it
means to write like a particular author, and to look more deeply into the meaning of
“meaning,” then AI can serve as both a mirror onto ourselves and a window onto
others. Today’s GPT-3 shows us that what we thought was most human might
eventually become replicable using augmented GPT-n Transformers-like
architectures.39 But it also affords us insight into the amazing power of our language
games, which are key to understanding what it means to be human.

Notes
1

Hilary Putnam, “The Meaning of "Meaning," Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1975.

2

Nikolay Milkov, “A New Interpretation of Leibniz’s Concept of characteristic universalis,” in Einheit in der
Vielheit, Proceedings of the 8th International Leibniz-Congress, vol. 1, ed. Hans Poser (Hannover, 2006), 606–614.
3

Richard Zach, “Hilbert's Program,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Center for the Study of Language and
Information, May 24, 2019. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2019/entries/hilbert-program
4

Paul Ibbotson and Michael Tomasello, “What’s Universal Grammar? Evidence Rebuts Chomsky’s Theory of
Language Learning,” Scientific American, November 2016.
5

John Shalf, “The future of computing beyond Moore’s Law,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 378, no 2166 (2020): 20190061,
http://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061.
6

D. Flickinger, C. Pollard and Tom Wasow, “Chapter 2 The evolution of HPSG,” (2018).

7

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, L. Kaiser and Illia
Polosukhin, “Attention is All You Need,” ArXiv.org 1706.03762 (December 6, 2017).
8

Alec Radford, “Better Language Models and Their Implications,” OpenAI.com, February 14, 2019,
https://openai.com/blog/better-language-models/.
9

“Kenyon College Digital Humanities,” Kenyon.edu, 2018, https://www.kenyon.edu/digital-humanities/.

10

Greg Brockman, Mira Murati, Peter Welinder and OpenAI, “OpenAI API,” OpenAI.com, June 11, 2020,
https://openai.com/blog/openai-api/.
11

Brown et al., “Language Models are Few-Shot Learners,” ArXiv.org, 2005.14165 (May 28, 2020).

12

Jay Alammar, “The Illustrated Transformer,” JAlammar.github.io, June 27, 2018,
http://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-transformer/.
13

Aditya Joshi, “GPT3 Examples,” GPT3Examples.com, accessed September 2, 2020, https://gpt3examples.com/.

14

Farhad Manjoo, “How Do You Know a Human Wrote This?” The New York Times, July 29, 2020.

14

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

15

Computerphile, “GPT3: An Even Bigger Language Model.” YouTube Video, 25:56, July 1, 2020
https://youtu.be/_8yVOC4ciXc?t=404
16

Gwern Branwen, “Gwern.net Index of Essays,” Gwern.net, accessed September 2, 2020, https://www.gwern.net/.

17

“Digital Humanities Projects,” Kenyon.edu, 2018, https://www.kenyon.edu/digital-humanities/projects/.

18

Feni Betriana et al., “Relating Mori’s Uncanny Valley in Generating Conversations with Artificial Affective
Communication and Natural Language Processing,” Nursing Philosophy, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1111/nup.12322.
19

Line Baudry, “Chatbots and the Uncanny Valley of Linguistics,” SoftbankRobotics.com, February 27, 2020,
https://developer.softbankrobotics.com/blog/chatbots.
20

Hahn, Michael. “Theoretical Limitations of Self-Attention in Neural Sequence Models.” ArXiv.org 1906.06755
(12 Feb 2020).
21

Khari Johnson, “StereoSet Measures Racism, Sexism, and Other Forms of Bias in AI Language Models,”
VentureBeat.com, April 23, 2020, https://venturebeat.com/2020/04/22/stereoset-measures-racism-sexism-and-otherforms-of-bias-in-ai-language-models/.
22

Moravec, Hans. "Rise of the Robots." Scientific American 281, no. 6 (1999): 124-35. Accessed September 3,
2020. http://www.jstor.org/stable/26058531.
23

“A New AI Language Model Generates Poetry and Prose,” The Economist, August 8, 2020,
https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/2020/08/08/a-new-ai-language-model-generates-poetry-andprose.
24

Daniel Ziegler, “Fine-Tuning GPT-2 from Human Preferences,” OpenAI.com, September 19, 2019,
https://openai.com/blog/fine-tuning-gpt-2/.
25

Jon Chun, “How Artificial Intelligence Tells Stories: Natural Language Generation and Narrative,” (Presented at
Narrative 2020 Conference, New Orleans, March 5 2020), https://www.narrative2020.org/program.
26

Professor LatinX, “Professors Katherine Elkins and Jon Chun Talk: Narrative and Artificial Intelligence,”
YouTube Video, 27:56, June 3, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h3bRJw22hjw
27

The Economist, August 8, 2020.

28

“Typically, a Taoist/Chan-Buddhist adopts a passive attitude toward the world and sees being as evolved from
nonbeing…nothing in all and all in nothing,” Zhaoming Qian, Orientalism and Modernism: The Legacy of China in
Pound and Williams (Durham: Duke University Press, 1995), 152. Qian traces the influence of these ideas on many
twentieth-century English-speaking poets. It’s possible that GPT-2, trained on a corpus that includes these poets, has
created a new hybrid Donne.
29

Justin Weinberg, “Philosophers On GPT-3 (Updated with Replies by GPT-3),” DailyNous.com, July 31, 2020,
https://dailynous.com/2020/07/30/philosophers-gpt-3/.
30

Karen Hao, “A College Kid Created a Fake, AI-Generated Blog. It Reached #1 on Hacker News.,” MIT
Technology Review, August 16, 2020, https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/08/14/1006780/ai-gpt-3-fake-blogreached-top-of-hacker-news/.
31

Essay #1: https://gist.github.com/minimaxir/f4998c20f2520ad5969b03c9590f16ce. Essay #2:
https://pastebin.com/3AEtjv35. Essay #3: https://pastebin.com/p3kjgqVB. Essay #4:
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1B-OymgKE1dRkBcJ7fVhTs9hNqx1IuUyW/view.

15

C AN GPT-3 PASS A WRITER’S TURING TEST?

32

Graham Oppy and David Dowe, “The Turing Test,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Center for the Study
of Language and Information, last modified August 18, 2020, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/turing-test/.
33

Gary Marcus and Ernest Davis, “GPT-3, Bloviator: OpenAI's Language Generator Has No Idea What It's Talking
About,” MIT Technology Review, August 22, 2020, https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/08/22/1007539/gpt3openai-language-generator-artificial-intelligence-ai-opinion/amp/?__twitter_impression=true.
34

Charniak, Eugene. ACL Lifetime Achievement Speech 2011. “The Brain as a Statistical Inference Engine—and
You Can Too.” MIT CogNet, accessed September 3 2020, http://cognet.mit.edu/pdfviewer/journal/coli_a_00080.
35

Johannes Bruder, “Infrastructural Intelligence: Contemporary Entanglements between Neuroscience and AI,”
Progress in Brain Research Vital Models - The Making and Use of Models in the Brain Sciences, 2017, pp. 101-128,
https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.pbr.2017.06.004.
36

For more on the limitations of this model see Hahn, Michael. “Theoretical Limitations of Self-Attention in Neural
Sequence Models.” Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 8 (2019): 156-171.
37

Frederick Luis Aldama, “Humanities and Cognitive Sciences High School Summer Institute,” Center for
Cognitive and Brain Sciences – The Ohio State University, accessed September 3, 2020,
https://cog.osu.edu/programs/humanities-and-cognitive-sciences-summer-institute.
38

Jon Chun and Katherine Elkins, “AI for the Humanities: A Multidisciplinary Approach to Artificial Intelligence,”
AI for the Humanities, 2017, https://aiforthehumanities.wordpress.com/.
39

In parallel, groups are researching vertical chip design, analog computational designs, and alternative biological
approaches like organoids and brain-computer interfaces.

16

