Journal of
Cultural Analytics

November 23, 2020

A Computational Approach to Urban
Space in Science Fiction
Federica Bologna
Federica Bologna, Università di Bologna
Peer-Reviewer: Matthew Erlin
Dataverse DOI: 10.7910/DVN/VXEK7A
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549

ABSTRACT
This study analyzes the presence of urban space in 20th century science fiction in English using
computational methods. Three theoretical approaches are used to model urban space as a
measurable feature. First, urban space is formalized as a topic. LDA topic modeling is used to
retrieve the urban topic from the corpus and estimate its presence in each book. Secondly, urban
space is formalized as the sum of the linguistic fragments that form a setting. A list of urban
terms is created and their frequency is measured for each novel. Lastly, cityspace is formalized
as the number of references to urban locations. Textual Geographies’ geographic data was used
to measure the presence of named urban locations in each book. The results of these approaches
all point to similar conclusions. A low presence of urban space is found in science fiction
compared to general fiction, alongside a historical trend. Urban presence in science fiction is
greater at the beginning of the 20th century, declines in the 30s and 40s, and successively
increases in the 50s. No such dip is present in other types of fiction across the twentieth century.

The goal of this study is to measure and analyze the presence of urban space in 20th
century science fiction in English using computational methods.1 Urban space is
modeled using three different approaches. This study’s results demonstrate science
fiction’s significant lack of attention to urban space in comparison to other works of
fiction. They also provide strong evidence of a peculiar historical trend in urban
attention. In science fiction, high attention to urban space at the beginning of the
century is followed by a decline between the world wars and a rise in the 50s. In
other types of fiction, by contrast, we observe a steady increase in urban attention
over time.

Urban space and science fiction
Many have argued for space’s relevance for the investigation of social life. Both
Henri Lefebvre and Edward W. Soja affirm that it is in the production of space that

Journal of Cultural Analytics 4.11 (2020): 37-60. doi: 10.22148/001c.18120

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

all social relations, “whether they are linked to class, family, community, market,
[or] state power” are made concrete and material;2 Michel Foucault claims that the
spatial dimension enables one to unveil the workings of power.3 Moreover, Lefevbre
believes that society’s development was possible only because of the creation of
urban society.4 Thus, investigating urban life brings insights on the nature and
transformations of a society.
On the other hand, as Fredric Jameson famously argues,5 science fiction provides
readers with a multiplicity of mock futures in which our complex and unfathomable
present time is crystallized. This genre enables the deconstruction and
defamiliarization of our experience of our time. Its concern with alternative worlds
sparks reflections on contemporary issues. Furthermore, many have used science
fiction to investigate questions related to space and urbanism. Ursula K. Heise
mentions well-known sci-fi novels to demonstrate the development of a global
spatial consciousness in literature.6 Carl Abbott studies sci-fi cities to enrich the
contemporary discussion on how cities should be built.7
Moreover, several scholars have pointed out the relevance and extensive presence
of futuristic metropolises in science fiction. Under the entry “Cities” of The
Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, Brian M. Stableford, David Langford and John
Clute organize numerous sci-fi works in different categories depending on their
vision of future cityscapes. They conclude:
In both sf writing and sf art, the city is one of the most important recurrent
images, and carries with it one of the richest, densest clusters of
associations to be found in the whole sf iconography.8
Similarly, before departing on his exploratory survey of the cities represented in
science fiction literature from the mid of the 20th century onward in “The Science
Fiction City”, John Dean not only states that cities bring dramatic force to sci-fi
narrations, but also that urban spaces are numerous in the genre:
The presence of a city in a work of science fiction heightens the drama of
living in the future. [...] The city plays an important part in a wide range
of modern science fiction literature [...] To repeat: in sf cities are legion.9

38

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

For his part, Jameson argues that not only cities, but space in general plays an
instrumental role in sci-fi stories. Nonetheless, while discussing the surprising
narrative powers at play in science fiction, he confirms the presence of several urban
figurations in the genre, especially futuristic ones:
Many SF cityscapes and utopias seem to participate in this curious
paradox: that what signals the constructed, invented, artificial nature of SF
as a genre - the palpable fact that an author has strained her or his invention
to contrive some near or far future city [...] is here an unexpected source
of strength.10
The great number of cities in science fiction and the genre’s lasting concern with
cityscapes seem to be generally accepted by the existing scholarship on the matter.
In addition, more recent works now draw upon this belief to build specific analyses
and arguments regarding urban space in sci-fi literature.11

Conceptualizing space in text
In the context of the vast literature about the conceptualization of space, the present
analysis locates itself in the realm of Edward Soja’s theories. Specifically, it aims to
investigate what Soja refers to as First space: the perceived, material, empirical and
socially produced space constructed in the novels under study.12 Being only an initial
exploration of space, this study does not take into consideration the two other modes
of spatiality identified by Soja - Second and Third space. Nonetheless, detecting First
space in sci-fi novels provides us with insights on these two other modes of spatiality
as well.
To model the concept of urban space as a measurable textual feature, we employed
three approaches. First, urban space is formalized as a topic, a coherent semantic
entity that crosses different genres. The best technique to retrieve topics from a large
corpus of texts is LDA topic modeling. This technique provides estimates of each
topic’s presence in each book of the collection. Therefore, LDA is performed on the
collection of sci-fi novels and a topic is chosen as the most concerned with
cityscapes. The topic’s presence in a novel is equivalent, for analytical purposes, to
the presence of urban space in said novel.

39

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

Secondly, urban space is formalized as the sum of linguistic fragments that create a
setting when combined in a text. The best technique to measure this type of textual
feature is to create a list of urban terms and calculate their frequency for each novel
in the collection. The number of occurrences of urban terms in each novel is then a
measure of the presence of urban space in that novel.
Lastly, cityspace is formalized as the number of references to existing urban
geographical locations. The best technique to measure the presence of named urban
locations in each book is to use the data available through the Textual Geographies
project.13 Thus, the number of names of urban locations in a book signals the level
of presence of urban space in that book.
All these features provide different perspectives on urban space. When combined,
they create a more comprehensive understanding of the presence of cityspace in
science fiction. Since each of these approaches is put in practice using a different
technique, the results too are heterogenous in form. However, all three types of data
point to similar conclusions. They show a low presence of urban space in science
fiction compared to general fiction, alongside a historical trend. Urban presence in
science fiction is greater at the beginning of the 20th century, declines in the 30s and
40s, and successively increases in the 50s. No such dip is present in other types of
fiction across the twentieth century.

The corpus
The corpus is built by combining the nominations for the Nebula, the Hugo, and the
Retro-Hugo awards. The Nebula and the Hugo have been awarded annually for
science-fiction and fantasy works of the previous year since 1966 and 1955
respectively. Whereas, the Retro-Hugo awards were awarded in 1996, 2001, 2004,
2014, 2016, 2018, 2019, and 2020 for works published in 1946, 1951, 1954, 1939,
1941, 1943, 1944, and 1945 respectively. To fill in the decades preceding the
establishment of these prizes, I include the sci-fi novels used by Ted Underwood in
his book Distant Horizons.14 These sources form an initial corpus of 726 novels, of
which only 330 (45%) are found in the HathiTrust collection. Among these, 234 are
prize-nominated books and 96 derive from Underwood’s list.

40

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Combining these sources ensures that the novels in the corpus constitute one broadly
plausible and compelling representation (among many) of the genre. Indeed, the
Nebula is given by science-fiction writers, whereas the Hugo and Retro-Hugo are
awarded by fans. The genre designations of the individual works are not manually
checked, in order to avoid imposing my own biased and fixed definition of sciencefiction. The concept of genre has always evaded delineation and critics are yet to
reach an agreement on which are the distinctive features of long-standing genres
such as sci-fi.15 Consequently, I decide to trust the definition that spontaneously
arises from the preferences expressed by the science-fiction community, here
represented in the form of the nominations for the three aforementioned awards.

Urban space as a topic
Topic modeling is performed on individual pages using the scikit-learn Latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) library.16 The model is fine-tuned by running the
algorithm several times and evaluating each result depending on: how even is the
topics’ distribution in the topic space; the presence of a topic about urban space; and
which novels show the highest percentage of this topic.

Figure 1: Distribution of the novels in the science fiction corpus over time

41

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

The best model, in terms of even distribution of topics in the topic space and inner
semantic coherence of the topics themselves, is obtained by setting the number of
topics at 80, the number of features (or unique words) at 10000, and at 30%
maximum document frequency for each word. Looking at the model visualization,
topic 19’s top words are closely related to urban spaces, both ancient and modern:
city, street, building, crowd, traffic, park, driver, police, alley, aisle, sidewalk,
pavement, plaza, tar, pedestrian, metropolis, outskirt. Other topics in the model are
not as strikingly urban; for example, number 22 seems linked to nature and
explorations: mile, rock, mountain, range, road, flower, cliff, far, reach, valley, hill.
Therefore, topic 19 was chosen as the most suited for this analysis.
The books that contain a high proportion of topic 19 form a coherent if somewhat
unexpected bunch. Indeed, several of these novels depict ancient-looking cities,
challenging the conventional assumption that science fiction is concerned with
envisioning the city of the future. For example, Edgar Rice Burroughs’ The
Chessmen of Mars (1922), A Princess of Mars (1912), and Carson of Venus (1939)
are set on fictional planets structured in medieval-looking city-states ruled by royal
families, Williamson’s The Reign of Wizardry (1940) is set in Crete’s ancient capital
Knossos, and The Years of Rice and Salt (2002) by Kim Stanley Robinson travels
through many ancient and modern cities. Other books are set in cities, but do not
portray urban life: Christopher Priest’s The Inverted World (1974) is mostly set
outside the city’s perimeter; Ray Cummings’ The Shadow Girl (1929) tells of time
travelling through different epochs in New York City; Paolo Bacigalupi’s The
Windup Girl (2009) recounts futuristic Bangkok’s fight against climate change and
bioterrorism. However, there are also a few truly metropolitan stories, such as E. L.
Doctorow’s Ragtime (1975) and George S. Schuyler’s Black No More (1931), both
of which tell of social life and racial discrimination in New York City; or John
Brunner’s The Squares of The City (1965) that discusses issues like segregation,
inequality and political power in a fictional metropolis. A peculiar case is Jack
London’s The Scarlet Plague (1912), which is set in San Francisco after an epidemic
has depopulated the world. However, the flourishing metropolitan life preceding the
catastrophe is re-lived through the protagonist's memories. Both danger and
nostalgia are connected to cities in the book:

42

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

I've seen this beach alive with men, women, and children on a pleasant
Sunday. And there weren't any bears to eat them up, either. And right up
there on the cliff was a big restaurant where you could get anything you
wanted to eat. Four million people lived in San Francisco then. And now,
in the whole city and county there aren't forty all told17
As noted above, many of these novels depict ancient-looking cities. Although some
of them stand on the thin and foggy line separating science fiction and fantasy, they
all share an interest for scientific elements and have been recognized as worthy
exemplars of the genre by the science-fiction community delivering the Nebula and
Hugo awards. Therefore, these results challenge the shared belief18 that science
fiction represents futuristic cities, and reveal how difficult it is to detect and
distinguish different types of urban spaces linguistically, since they share the same
keywords. They raise questions regarding which type of urban spaces are to be
defined as unmistakably “urban” and which urbanism should be analyzed in literary
criticism. Nonetheless, it is possible that topic modeling might not be successful at
retrieving modern urban settings. Detecting urban space using two alternative
techniques – token counts and geolocations – helps us further understand the
presence, or absence, of cityspaces in sci-fi.

Urban space as token-counts
In “Towards a theory of space in narrative”, Zoran claims that, due to the linear and
temporal quality of language, the latter cannot grasp the totality and simultaneity of
space’s existence.19 In verbal narration, space is presented in segments that the
reader has to combine in order to reconstruct the narrated world. Ruth Ronen seems
to agree with Zoran’s theory, as she too argues that fictional spaces are “semantic
constructs” built by integrating a series of linguistic elements.20 Interestingly, she
argues that places can be denoted using both direct and indirect identification. For
example, a room can be identified by both its common noun and its objects.21 In
“Toward a Computational Archaeology of Fictional Space”, Dennis Yi Tenen too
argues that a “space can be understood through things”.22 All these theoretical
approaches to space in text seem to agree that, when the analysis is not interested in
the narrated space’s topography, space can be conceptualized as the sum of its
linguistic components. As a result, for the purposes of this study, space in text is

43

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

modeled as the sum of terms that indicate units and objects found in urban
landscapes.
To achieve this end, it is necessary to create a list of “urban” terms whose counts are
to be retrieved from the novels. The terms are manually collected from three sources:
Raymond Williams’ The Country and The City;23 Will Eisner’s New York: The Big
City;24 and the Macmillan Dictionary of English Language.25 This unconventionally
diverse set of sources provides a variety of terms that many sources of one typology
alone could have not forged: Williams’ work brings scholarly and refined idioms;
Eisner’s comics add more popular and slang expressions; and lastly, Macmillan
supplies standardized words. The terms are listed in their tokenized and lemmatized
form.26 The selected tokens depict the type of cityspace that is of most interest to my
research: a densely populated and technologically advanced space. The full list of
77 lemmas can be found in Appendix 1. In order to evaluate the presence of these
terms in science fiction, a secondary corpus is needed as a benchmark. For this
reason, a corpus that is fifty times the size of the first one is sampled at random from
HathiTrust fiction.27,28 This contrast corpus contains works from different genres and

Figure 2: boxplots representing the distribution of occurrences of urban locations per 100,000 words in each
corpus.

44

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

is constructed to follow the same distribution of novels by date of publication as the
science fiction corpus.
The first feature to analyze is the number of occurrences of urban terms per 100,000
words in a novel. In the box-and-whisker plots (figure 2), science fiction novels
show fewer urban words than general fiction books. To assess whether the corpora
are statistically different, three tests are used: the Welch’s t-test for independent
samples; the Mann-Whitney U; and the chi-squared test. Since the p-value is
significantly lower than 0.05 for all three tests, a statistical difference is found in the
number of occurrences of urban terms per novel among the two corpora.
In addition, the number of occurrences per decade are studied. The occurrences at
the book level are summed and grouped by decade, and a box-and-whisker plot is
created (figure 3 and 4). Most outliers are cut out of the visualization below so as to
have a clearer view of the boxes. The boxplot for the science fiction corpus shows a
peak in the 1910s, followed by a sudden decrease in the 1930s and the 1940s.
Interestingly, the mean occurrence of urban terms at the end of the century is lower
than that at the beginning of the century, going from around 350 words per 100,000
in the 1900, to less than 300 in the 2000s. On the other hand, in the random corpus,
the presence of urban terms steadily grows over the century. It has to be kept in mind
that in the corpus there are only 5 novels from the 1910s and they may not be
representative of all science fiction works published in that decade. Nonetheless, it
is still worth some reflection that those few books show such a high presence of
urban tokens.
The second feature is the number of occurrences per 100,000 words of an urban term
in each book of both collections. The chi-square test is performed on all the lemmas
in the collection. To reduce the amount of processing time, only 10% of the random
corpus is considered. All 59 urban lemmas are found to be distributed differently
between the corpora, meaning that the pattern of occurrence of one term in one
collection is different from the pattern of occurrence of the same term in the
opposing collection. For instance, the minimum, the median and the maximum value
in the distribution of the term “city” in the random corpus are around 1, 30 and 125
respectively. Whereas, the same values in the distribution of the same term in the
sci-fi corpus are around 1, 45, 180, respectively. Thus, in one book of the random
45

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

collection “city” occurs only once, and that happens to be the minimum number of
occurrences of the term in a book of the random corpus. To establish whether some
urban lemmas are more different in their distributions than non-urban lemmas, the
p-value of urban lemmas is then compared to that of lemmas that have a similar

Figure 3: box-and-whiskers plot representing the distribution of urban terms at the decade level.

Figure 4: box-and-whiskers plot representing the distribution of urban terms at the decade level.

46

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

number of occurrences per 100,000 words. Only the distributions of “city” in the
two corpora were significantly and statistically more different than the distributions
of words with a similar number of occurrences. Looking at the distributions of urban
lemmas in both collections, the lemmas with the lowest p-value correspond to the
most frequently occurring ones. After all, the chi-squared test prioritizes small
differences between big values over big differences between small values. On the
other hand, “suburb” and “metropolitan” were rare in both corpora but were found
to be significantly different because of their peculiar distributions. As a result, urban
tokens collectively were not found more different than other tokens of similar
frequency across the two collections, nor were their differences caused by their
higher presence in one of the two corpora.
To evaluate the effectiveness of this model at detecting urban space, it is now useful
to review the highest scoring books in terms of occurrences of urban tokens. With
regard to the science fiction corpus, this model based on token counts provides
results that are comparable to those obtained implementing LDA topic modeling. If
we define urban space as the technologically advanced metropolis, only nine of the
top twenty novels for number of occurrences of urban terms are set in such areas.
Similarly, of the top twenty novels for proportion of topic 19, only nine are set in
highly populated modern cities. In addition, the two rankings greatly overlap, as they
both include the following titles: Priest’s The Inverted World (1974); Brunner’s The
Squares of The City (1965); Cummings’ The Shadow Girl (1929); Doctorow’s
Ragtime (1975); Burroughs’ A Princess of Mars (1912); Bacigalupi’s The Windup
Girl (2009); Robinson’s The Years of Rice and Salt (2002); Burroughs’ Carson of
Venus (1939) and Silverberg’s Lord Valentine’s Castle (1980). Of the remaining
books in the tokens’ ranking, two are set in rural areas: Ray Bradbury’s Something
Wicked This Way Comes (1962) is set in a fictional small midwestern town
surrounded by prairies and Cyril M. Kornbluth’s Not This August (1955) is mostly
set in rural Chiunga County, NY. Even though big cities are occasionally mentioned
in the latter, they only appear in the background. Some books in the list are set in
worldly metropolises, like Walter Tevis’ Mockingbird (1980) and George R.
Stewart’s Earth Abides (1949). The first describes NYC with a sense of decadence
and despair. The second narrates the collapse of civilization due to the outbreak of a
pandemic and describes the cities’ decadent conditions with nostalgia. Other books
are set in invented cities, like Bradbury’s famous Fahrenheit 451 (1953) and Leigh
47

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

Brackett’s The Long Tomorrow (1955). Both Fahrenheit 451’s “The City” and The
Long Tomorrow’s Bartorstown are symbols of technological advancement. In the
first one, technology is used for violence and oppression, and the city is juxtaposed
to a restorative and welcoming wilderness. In the second, by contrast, science
enables the betterment of society and the city is set in contrast to underdeveloped
rural villages.
On the other hand, in the random corpus, the top three books for number of
occurrences of urban tokens are all children’s books. The repetition of few urban
terms and the brevity of these narrations cause the number of occurrences per
100,000 words to spike. The books identified do pay significant attention to urban
spaces. Jerrold Beim’s Andy And the School Bus (1947) tells the story of a child who
lives in the countryside and wants to take the bus to go to school in the city. Kermit,
Save the Swamp! (1992) by Richard Chevat recounts Kermit’s efforts to save his
native swamp from being transformed into a shopping mall and amusement park,
warning the reader about the disruptive forces of urbanization. Nonetheless, these
books only contain two or three of all the urban lemmas in the list. Therefore, a
second ranking is created consisting of books that contain at least twenty different
urban terms. All the top novels in this list are set in modern cities. Marina Snow’s
Ailanthus Park (2008) is set in Sacramento and Stephen Peter’s The Park Is Mine
(1981) is set in New York City. In Jim Crace’s Arcadia, urbanization is once again
portrayed as a corruptive force as its rich protagonist wants to tear down the city’s
local market to build a shopping center. The collection of short stories Marcovaldo
by Italo Calvino (1963) tells of a man born in the countryside living in an
industrialized city, connecting urban areas to environmental issues, poverty and
consumerism. Pier Paolo Pasolini’s Stories from the City of God (1995) is a mosaic
and heterogeneous representation of the cultural and social life of the outskirts of
Rome in the 50s and 60s.
Looking at these titles, it is clear that the urban tokens’ model effectively detects
books set in modern metropolises from the general corpus. Consequently, the lack
of urban novels among the sci-fi rankings is not due to the ineffectiveness of the
model, but rather seems to result from the nature of science fiction works themselves.
After all, all the books in the sci-fi rankings do pay some attention to some urban
spaces. Their stories may take place in metropolises turned to ruins and pre-modern
48

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

city-states or move across a variety of landscapes. Urban spaces are not completely
absent from these novels - which caused the model to retrieve novels that were not
set in populated modern cities. They are recollected in memory or used as backdrops
for the main story. As a result, urban environments end up coexisting with rural ones,
setting up a contrast between cities and countryside. In the retrieved novels, this
conflict appears to be instrumental in criticizing urbanism's corrupting and
destructive forces, but also in praising its prosperity in terms of culture, wellness and
economy. After all, the city-country antinomy comes from a long tradition of
pastoral texts and is not uncommon in science fiction either.23,8 The two spaces have
been in relentless dialogue in Western culture for a long time.
This section’s conclusions can be summarized into four points. First, science fiction
novels generally include fewer urban tokens than do other types of fiction. Secondly,
science fiction shows a high number of urban tokens at the beginning of the century,
a decrease in the 1930s and 40s and a rise in the 1950s. Third, urban tokens are not
exceptionally different in the distribution of their occurrences across the two
corpora. Lastly, reviewing the book ranking for the general fiction corpus reveals
that the token counts’ model is effective at retrieving books concerned with urban
spaces.

Urban space as geographic locations
Even though many science fiction works locate their stories in fictional settings or
use fictional names to address them, science fiction’s fascination with existing cities
is undeniable, as several works attempt to capture their fate and possible futures (e.g.
Neuromancer’s (1984) North-Eastern cities, the Bay Area of The Scarlet Plague
(1912) and Earth Abides (1949), the New York City of countless works). Therefore,
in order to accurately measure urban spaces’ presence in the genre, it is essential to
also take into account those instances where wordly locations are mentioned, by
measuring the number of occurrences of urban geolocations alongside topic
modeling and urban terms’ occurrences.
The geographic locations contained in both corpora are easily accessed thanks to the
Textual Geographies project, which makes available the geographic data related to
the HathiTrust digital library.13,29 For the purposes of this study, I define urban
49

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

locations as those associated with a third-level administrative area or lower
(including all localities).30
The first feature to analyze is the number of occurrences of urban locations per
100,000 words in a novel. In the box-and-whisker plots (figure 5), general fiction
novels show a higher number of occurrences. In order to assess whether there is a
statistically relevant difference in the distribution of occurrences of urban locations
per each novel, the Welch’s t-test, the Mann Whitney U test and the chi-squared test
are performed on the sci-fi and general corpora. A statistical difference in the number
of urban locations per 100,000 words in a book is found across the corpora, and we
can thus conclude that science fiction novels generally contain fewer named urban
places.

Figure 5: boxplots representing the distribution of occurrences of urban locations per 100,000 words in each
corpus.

Subsequently, the transformation in the number of occurrences of urban locations
over time is taken in consideration. All the occurrences for each novel are summed
and grouped by decade; the resulting box-and-whisker plots are shown in figure 6
and 7. The decade with the highest median value for the science fiction corpus is the
1910s, followed by a decrease in the 1930s and 1940s. In analyzing the data, it is
important to keep in mind that the first few decades of the century are the least
represented in the collection. Nonetheless, it is impressive that a small number of
books show such an intense interest in cityspace. This trend mirrors the one
50

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

described above for the number of occurrences of urban terms per 100,000 words.
On the other hand, in the general fiction corpus, the number of urban locations per
100,000 words remains stable throughout the analyzed period of time.

Figure 6&7: box-and-whiskers plot representing the distribution of the occurrences of urban locations at the decade
level.

51

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

Lastly, simple linear regression is performed on the occurrences of urban locations
and the occurrences of urban terms for each novel to test the possibility of a
correlation between these two features. Specifically, the correlation between urban
geodata and urban tokens is first tested in both corpora. Then the correlation is also
tested in the science fiction corpus only. A residual plot is created to ensure that
linear regression is a good fit for the data. Once that is confirmed, the data is passed
through a logarithmic function so that the plot and regression line appear more
clearly (figure 8). The regression line is slightly skewed. In the two corpora,
Pearson’s coefficient and the coefficient of determination for the two variables are
0.17 and 0.04 respectively. Whereas, in the sci-fi corpus only, the two coefficients
are 0.23 and 0.05. Therefore, the two variables seem to slightly move together.
However, their relationship can hardly explain the variation of each of them.
Three main conclusions can be drawn. First, science fiction novels generally contain
fewer occurrences of urban geographical locations. Secondly, science fiction shows
a peak in urban location in the 1910s, followed by a decrease in the 1930s. Lastly,
no strong correlation was found between number of occurrences of urban terms and
number of occurrences of urban locations.

Figure 8: scatterplot of the occurrences’ data points with the regression line

52

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

Conclusions
Lack of urban novels and urban space in science fiction
Among the top twenty science fiction novels with the highest presence of the city
topic or the highest number of occurrences of urban tokens, only a few are set in
densely populated and technologically advanced cities. There are two possible
causes for these results: 1.) there may be fewer science fiction novels set in urban
areas than critics have generally believed, or 2.) sci-fi novels set in metropolises may
render urban space via idiosyncratic or neologistic language.
In order to address the first point, I turned to Abbott’s Imagining Urban Futures.7
Of the many novels he mentions for their representation of urban areas, only two
titles appear in the rankings summarized above: Bacigalupi’s The Windup Girl
(2009) and Priest’s The Inverted World (1974). Surprisingly, most of Abbott’s
novels were not present in the corpus, as they had not been nominated for any of the
three awards aforementioned. Nonetheless, other novels mentioned by Abbott and
contained in the corpus did not appear in the rankings: in Isaac Asimov’s Foundation
series, Trantor, the capital of the Galactic Empire, is a technological advanced
metropolis as vast as a planet; and William Gibson’s Neuromancer (1984) is set in
“BAMA, the Sprawl, the Boston-Atlanta Metropolitan Axis”.31 Even though these
novels were in the corpus, none was among the highest scoring ones for presence of
urban spaces. This might be due to the lack of material descriptions of cityspace in
these novels.
To address the second cause, I turned to the number of occurrences of urban tokens
and urban locations. With regard to both of these measures, science fiction shows
lower numbers than general fiction. Even the sci-fi novels that have the highest
number of occurrences of urban tokens in the genre’s corpus do not describe their
settings as thoroughly as general fiction works do. The top fifty general fiction books
for occurrences of urban terms show twice as many occurrences as the top science
fiction novels. Looking at the books reviewed above, it seems that the city is both a
symbol of cultural and technological advancement and a site of decadence and
destruction in sci-fi novels. In Jack London’s The Scarlet Plague (1912), the disease
that will depopulate the world first appears and spreads in big cities. The epidemic
53

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

recounted in George R. Stewart’s Earth Abides (1949) follows the same dynamic.
However, the protagonists of both books reminisce about the cultural richness and
wellness that cities and progress offered. In Leigh Brackett’s The Long Tomorrow
(1955), cities and the scientific knowledge they nurture are seen as the cause for the
outbreak of a nuclear war. However, the protagonists are fascinated by technology
and decide to live in a forbidden city where scientific research is allowed. Spinrad’s
The Iron Dream (1972), Bacigalupi’s The Windup Girl (2009) and Bradbury’s
Fahrenheit 451 (1953) are all set in capitals at the rise of an authoritarian regime.
Such totalitarianisms cause civil and international wars that almost wipe out
humanity. In Kornbluth’s Not This August (1955), cities are connected to a low
quality of life and warfare. In these books, cityspace symbolizes both the best and
worst of humankind’s progress. Another group of texts is formed by Burroughs’
Barsoom series, Silverberg’s Lord Valentine’s Castle (1980), Williamson’s The
Reign of Wizardry (1940) and Robinson’s The Years of Rice and Salt (2002). They
do not present dystopian visions, but here too cities are the centers of political and
cultural power.
It appears that science fiction novels mention cityspace more because of its symbolic
value than as a realistic setting. Cities are the ground where major events take place.
Sci-fi novels are not focused on cityspace’s social dynamics as much as works of
general fiction are. Exceptions to this trend seem to be Brunner’s The Squares of The
City (1965) and Doctorow’s Ragtime (1975). Here, the metropolis is not the
birthplace of human destruction, but the place of enactment of social inequality,
discrimination and violence.
Historical trend in urban attention
Science fiction shows a high presence of urban spaces at the beginning of the
century, followed by a decrease between the 30s and 40s, and a consecutive increase
in the 50s. These dates match major events in United States’ history that transformed
the face and soul of the country. First, the massive urbanization of the United States
started in the 1870s and the nation reached urban-majority status between 1910 and
1920. This growth came almost to a halt between the 1930s and the 1940s.32
Additionally, the Immigration Act of 1924 limited the number of European
immigrants and banned Asian and Indian immigration, almost forcing to a stop the
54

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

influx of immigrants that took place from the 1890s to 1920.33,34 Since the great
urban areas of the Northeast did not receive as many immigrants after that point,
they grew at a slower pace. Cities suffered another hit when the Great Depression
struck the US and the whole world in 1929. After decades of migration from rural to
urban areas, the trend was reversed as millions headed back to their family farms.35
This was due to the collapse of the construction and manufacturing industries, which
caused millions to lose their jobs, both high-paying and low-paying ones.36
Looking at the science fiction novels published in the 1910s, not all of them have a
high number of occurrences of urban terms. Conan Doyle’s The Lost World (1912)
is set in an unexplored part of the Amazon basin and A Columbus of Space (1911)
by Garrett P. Serviss tells of an expedition in outer space. Both show a number of
occurrences that is lower than the corpus’ average. Nonetheless, J. D. Beresford’s
Goslings (1913) and Jack London’s The Scarlet Plague (1912) show an above
average number of occurrences even though no functioning city is represented. Both
recount the spreading of a disease which decimates the world population.
Furthermore, Burrough’s A Princess of Mars (1912) is the book with the highest
number of occurrences in the Barsoom series. Looking at these titles, it seems that
in the 1910s science fiction cannot imagine a better form of human settlement than
the city. In contrast, in the 1930s, novels are concerned with the future of humanity
in its ethical and social aspects, but their number of occurrences of urban tokens is
below the corpus’ average: Olaf Stapledon’s Last and First Men (1930) tells the
history of humankind over two billion years starting from the early 21st century;
Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World (1932) narrates about humankind in the year AF
(After Ford) 632 (AD 2540 in the Gregorian calendar); H. G. Wells’ Star Begotten
(1937) recounts how a group of men suspects Martians are genetically modifying
the human race.
An intriguing pattern seems to emerge from these works: science fiction from the
1930s is not just concerned with a nation’s fate, but with the fate of humankind. The
events of these novels have global consequences and present a global consciousness.
After all, by the mid-1930s, the Great War had taken place, totalitarianisms had risen
all over Europe, and the atomic bomb had become part of the public’s imagination.
It thus comes as no surprise that the science fiction of the 1930s is worried about
humans’ survival. Despite the drought starving the countryside and the economic
55

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

crisis taking over cities, science fiction novels appear not to address such prosaic
issues. Such subjects are being covered – either realistically or allegorically – by
William Faulkner, John Dos Passos, Pearl S. Buck, Margaret Mitchell, John
Steinbeck, Nathaniel West, Zora Neale Hurston, and others. On the other hand,
science fiction seems to answer the public’s anxieties by either speculating on
potential global events or providing an escape. Two more books of the 1930s are an
example of the first trend: Sinclair Lewis’ It Can’t Happen Here (1935) speculates
on the consequences of the rise of a despotic leader to the position of President of
the United States; and J. B. Priestley’s The Doomsday Men (1938) tells of three
brothers’ plan to blow up the entire world and three strangers’ inability to stop them.
An example of the second trend is T. H. White’s The Sword in the Stone (1938), a
fantasy novel revisiting the legend of King Arthur. An exception to this trend is
Schuyler’s Black No More (1931), which stood at the intersection of the Harlem
Renaissance and science fiction and now belongs to Afrofuturism.
The genre partially regains interest in urban areas from the 50s onward. This increase
in urban space might seem to challenge my previous assertion. Due to the beginning
of the Cold War, the period that followed WWII is characterized by intense paranoia
and anxiety. The tension between the United States and the Soviet Union, and the
countries’ arms race, turns human extinction into an increasingly realistic threat in
the minds of the American people.37 At the same time, post-war wealth and
economic growth gives rise to a feeling of optimism.38 More and more families come
out of poverty into a growing middle class that can sustain a high standard of living.
This new purchasing power combined with federal aid and the development of
suburbs that offer cheap standardized houses for the masses results in a housing
boom and suburbanization.39 This contradiction between enthusiasm for an
apparently never-ending urban and economic expansion, and worry of mass
extinction likely comes to be rooted in Americans’ everyday life. It also appears to
permeate the science fiction of that time. In these novels, nuclear wars and urban
areas come to coexist. In Not This August (1955), cities survive the conflict between
the Western and Eastern blocks. In The Long Tomorrow, despite all American cities
having been destroyed by a nuclear war, new towns and an underground city
reflourish in the war’s aftermath. In Fahrenheit 451 (1953), Montag and the rebels
plan to rebuild civilization from the City’s ruins after nuclear bombs have obliterated
it. Lastly, The Iron Dream (1972)’s Heldhime has been rebuilt after a global nuclear
56

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

war had destroyed the previous civilization. As the possibility of human extinction
is increasingly normalized, it seemingly ceases to exclude urban areas from sci-fi
narration. Cities are depicted as the cause and aftermath of human annihilation,
forming a cycle that sees no alternative, and urbanism is represented as a necessary
condition for the reconstruction of civilization.
The results of this study have several implications for the investigation of urban
space and of science fiction. Contrary to what has long been assumed, cities are
rather unpopular in sci-fi. While I have speculated on the reasons both for that
assumption and for the observed lack of urban orientation, there is obviously a need
for additional work. The expectation of an urban orientation might be due to the
influence that other media (film in particular) in the genre has exerted on the public.
Furthermore, the lack of urban terms in novels that are considered to be distinctively
urban raises questions as to what characterizes an urban novel. Which criteria should
we use in order to classify urban novels? Is having an urban setting enough, or should
that setting be thoroughly described? Moreover, it has often been assumed that urban
spaces in sci-fi are always technological and vertical metropolises. In light of the
genre’s fascination for other kinds of urbanism as well, it is essential to reconsider
this stereotypical vision of the science fiction city. More attention should be paid to
other less-known and less-stereotypically-futuristic cityscapes. In addition,
comparisons should be drawn among sci-fi works belonging to different decades, as
science fiction transforms and re-adapts itself to new historical conditions over time.
This approach might unveil shifts in the public’s expectations toward the genre and
how the latter has fulfilled the needs of its readership. I hope for this study to
encourage other researchers and to help overcome the countless paralyzing biases
that have long discredited this genre and its study.

57

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

Appendix 1
The following are the 77 lemmas that have been retrieved from the novels and
counted in order to measure the occurrence of urban terms.
city
chinatown
highway
intersection
skyscraper
metropolitan
metropolis
enclave
freeway
crossroad
building
suburban
megalopolis
ghetto
speedway
wayside
park
suburbanize
conurbation
hood
street
lane
metro
gentrify
town
midtown

alley
traffic
subway
gentrification
neighborhood
outskirt
avenue
streetlight
bus
crowd
suburb
plaza
ave
lamppost
concrete
uptowner
borough
riverfront
boulevard
hydrant
asphalt
downtowner
downtown
shanty
blvd
port

tar
homeless
uptown
shantytown
backstreet
theater
bitumen
commuter
barrio
slum
promenade
mall
urban
commute
burbs
road
sidewalk
market
urbanize
pedestrian
driveway
curbside
library
urbanization
sewer

References
1. I thank Matthew Wilkens (Cornell University), whose guidance and supervision has been of incommensurable
value. I also thank Kristoffer L. Nielbo (Aarhus University) and Ross D. Kristensen-McLachlan (Aarhus University)
and the researchers of the Center for Humanities Computing Aarhus for their instrumental help and support. Lastly, I
thank Mads Rosendahl Thomsen (Aarhus University) for the hospitality and having created a stimulating
environment at Aarhus University.
2. Soja, Edward W. Postmetropolis: Critical Studies of Cities and Regions (Blackwell, 2000): 9.
3. Foucault, Michel “Questions on Geography.” In Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings
1972-1977, translated by C. Gordon. (New York: Pantheon): 63-77. Quoted in Edward W. Soja. Thirdspace: A
Journey through Los Angeles and Other Real-and-Imagined Places (Blackwell, 1996: 69-70)

58

JOURNAL OF CULTURAL ANALYTICS

4. Lefebvre, Henri. Le droit à la ville/Espace et politique (Paris: Anthropos, 1968). Quoted in Edward W. Soja,
Postmetropolis: Critical Studies of Cities and Regions, (Blackwell, 2000): 19.
5. Jameson, Frederic. Archaeologies of the future: The desire called utopia and other science fictions (Verso, 2005):
286-8.
6. Heise, Ursula K. Sense of place and sense of planet: The environmental imagination of the global. (Oxford
University Press, 2008): 3.
7. Abbott, Carl. Imagining urban futures: cities in science fiction and what we might learn from them. (Wesleyan
University Press, 2016): 24-35.
8. Stableford, Brian M, David Langford, and John Clute. “Cities,” The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Eds. John
Clute, David Langford, Peter Nicholls and Graham Sleight. Gollancz, 31 Aug. 2018. Accessed 28 Apr. 2020.
http://www.sf-encyclopedia.com/entry/cities. The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, which contains all sorts of
information about science fiction authors, books, films and themes and has been periodically updated from 1979 up
to this day.
9. Dean, John “Science Fiction City,” Foundation 23 (October 1981): 64-65.
10. Jameson, Fredric. “Science Fiction as a Spatial Genre: Generic Discontinuities and the Problem of Figuration in
Vonda Mclntyre's "The Exile Waiting",” Science Fiction Studies (1987): 54.
11. Graham, Stephen. “Vertical noir: Histories of the future in urban science fiction,” City 20.3 (2016): 389-390;
Shaw, Debra Benita. “Strange zones: Science fiction, fantasy and the posthuman city,” City 17.6 (2013): 778,781.
12. Soja, Edward W. Thirdspace: A Journey through Los Angeles and Other Real-and- Imagined Places.
Blackwell, 1996.
13. Wilkens, Matthew et al., Textual Geographies. Accessed May 18, 2020. http://www.txtgeo.net/.
14. Underwood, Ted. Distant Horizons: Digital Evidence and Literary Change (University of Chicago Press, 2019).
15. Wilkens, Matthew. “Genre, Computation, and the Varieties of Twentieth-Century U.S. Fiction,” Cultural
Analytics (Nov. 1, 2016): 2-3. DOI: 10.22148/16.009.
16. Pedregosa, Fabian, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel,
Mathieu Blondel, et al., Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python, JMLR 12 (2011): 2825-2830
17. London, Jack. The Scarlet Plague (London: Mills, 1916): 29-30.
18. See the first section “Urban space and science fiction”.
19. Zoran, Gabriel. "Towards a theory of space in narrative." Poetics today 5.2 (1984): 312-3.
20. Ronen, Ruth. "Space in fiction." Poetics Today 7.3 (1986): 421-438.
21. Ibid. 421,430.
22. Tenen, Dennis Yi. "Toward a computational archaeology of fictional space." New Literary History 49.1 (2018):
119-147.
23. Williams, Raymond. The country and the city. Vol. 423. (Oxford University Press, 1975).
24. Eisner, Will. New York: The Big City (WW Norton & Company, 2006).

59

A COMPUTATIONAL APPROACH TO URBAN SPACE IN SCIENCE FICTION

25. Macmillan Dictionary, “Areas in Towns or Cities - Synonyms and Related Words.” Accessed May 18, 2020.
https://www.macmillandictionary.com/thesaurus-category/british/areas-in-towns-or-cities
26. The words “outskirts” and “crossroads” are typed without the final “s”, as WordNet Lemmatizer wrongly
transforms them in a non-existent singular form when encountering them in the corpus. Unfortunately, several noun
groups (e.g. “city center”) are left out since words are stored without their linguistic context in the HathiTrust
Research Center Extracted Features Dataset.
27. Capitanu, Boris et al. The HathiTrust Research Center Extracted Feature Dataset (1.0) [Dataset]. HathiTrust
Research Center, 2016. Last modified May 14, 2020. Accessed May 19, 2020. http://dx.doi.org/10.13012/J8X63JT3.
28. Underwood, Ted, Boris Capitanu, Peter Organisciak, Sayan Bhattacharyya, Loretta Auvil, Colleen Fallaw, J.
Stephen Downie, Word Frequencies in English-Language Literature, 1700-1922 (0.2) [Dataset]. HathiTrust
Research Center. 2015. Last modified June 25, 2019. Accessed May 18, 2020.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13012/J8JW8BSJ.
29. The data is produced by first extracting the named locations from the volumes using Stanford’s named entity
recognizer (NER). Then, the resulting location strings are associated with geographic data from Google’s Places and
Geocoding APIs. Once the geographic data is retrieved, the addresses are manually checked for greater accuracy. A
more complete description of this process can be found in Evans, Elizabeth, and Matthew Wilkens. "Nation,
Ethnicity, and the Geography of British Fiction, 1880-1940." Cultural Analytics (July 13, 2018): 16
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/psg2z
30. Google, “Place Types | Places API | Google Developers.” Accessed May 18, 2020.
https://developers.google.com/places/supported_types.
31. William Gibson, Neuromancer (New York: Ace Books, 1984), 57.
32. U.S. Census Bureau. “2010 Census of Population and Housing, Population and Housing Unit Counts, CPH-2-5:
United States Summary,” (U.S. Government Printing Office, 2012): 20-6.
33. Higham, John. Strangers in the land: Patterns of American nativism, 1860-1925 (Rutgers University Press,
2002), 301-330.
34. U.S. Department of State, “The Immigration Act of 1924 (The Johnson-Reed Act).” Accessed May 18, 2020.
https://history.state.gov/milestones/1921-1936/immigration-act.
35. Boyd, Robert L. "A "migration of despair": unemployment, the search for work, and migration to farms during
the Great Depression." Social Science Quarterly 83.2 (2002): 554-567
36. Bernstein, Michael A. The Great Depression: delayed recovery and economic change in America, 1929-1939
(Cambridge University Press, 1987), 74.
37. Buck, Stephanie. “Fear of Nuclear Annihilation Scarred Children Growing up in the Cold War, Studies Later
Showed.” Medium. Timeline, August 29, 2017. Accessed May 18, 2020. https://timeline.com/nuclear-war-childpsychology-d1ff491b5fe0.
38. Wiefek, Nancy. The impact of economic anxiety in postindustrial America (Greenwood Publishing Group,
2003), 3.
39. Kenneth T. Jackson, Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States. (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1987).

60

