Journal of
Cultural Analytics

January 18, 2021

Abolitionist Networks: Modeling Lan­
guage Change in Nineteenth­Century
Activist Newspapers
Sandeep Soni, Lauren F. Klein and Jacob Eisenstein
Sandeep Soni School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta. sandeepsoni@gatech.edu.
Lauren F. Klein Departments of English and Quantitative Theory and Methods, Emory University, Atlanta. lauren.klein@emory.
edu.
Jacob Eisenstein Google Research, Seattle. jeisenstein@google.com
Peer­Reviewers:David Smith, Richard Jean So
Dataverse DOI:10.7910/DVN/EWYMFG

ABSTRACT

The abolitionist movement of the nineteenth­century United States remains among the most significant social and political
movements in US history. Abolitionist newspapers played a crucial role in spreading information and shaping public
opinion around a range of issues relating to the abolition of slavery. These newspapers also serve as a primary source of
information about the movement for scholars today, resulting in powerful new accounts of the movement and its leaders.
This paper supplements recent qualitative work on the role of women in abolition’s vanguard, as well as the role of the Black
press, with a quantitative text modeling approach. Using diachronic word embeddings, we identify which newspapers
tended to lead lexical semantic innovations — the introduction of new usages of specific words — and which newspapers
tended to follow. We then aggregate the evidence across hundreds of changes into a weighted network with the newspapers
as nodes; directed edge weights represent the frequency with which each newspaper led the other in the adoption of a lexical
semantic change. Analysis of this network reveals pathways of lexical semantic influence, distinguishing leaders from
followers, as well as others who stood apart from the semantic changes that swept through this period. More specifically,
we find that two newspapers edited by women — The Provincial Freeman and The Lily — led a large number of semantic
changes in our corpus, lending additional credence to the argument that a multiracial coalition of women led the abolitionist
movement in terms of both thought and action. It also contributes additional complexity to the scholarship that has sought
to tease apart the relation of the abolitionist movement to the women’s suffrage movement, and the vexed racial politics
that characterized their relation.

Introduction
Scholars often grapple with the power they hold as the producers of historical
knowledge, as well as with the historical forces of power that shaped the docu­
ments that provide them with evidence about the past.1 These forces of power
are plainly apparent in the newspapers that document the abolitionist movement
of the nineteenth­century United States. These newspapers played a crucial role
in spreading information and shaping public opinion about the abolition of slav­
Journal of Cultural Analytics 1 (2021): 1­43. doi: 10.22148/001c.18841

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

Doug
FLW
GLB
Lib
Lily
NASS
NEra
PF
TCA
TCR

Douglass Newspapers
Frank Leslie’s Weekly
Godey’s Lady’s Book
The Liberator
The Lily
National Anti­Slavery Standard
The National Era
The Provincial Freeman
The Colored American
The Christian Recorder

Figure 1: A spring layout of the ten newspapers in our collection, in which newspapers are positioned nearby in
space to the extent that they influence each other;4 the strength of the pairwise influence is also reflected in the
darkness of the tie. Dark gray nodes represent members of the Black press; nodes with darker outlines represent
publications edited by and/or aimed at women. For more details on the newspapers, see Data.

ery and related social justice issues. They also now serve as a primary source of
information about abolition for scholars today. And yet, these newspapers are
still subject to the historical forces that surrounded their production: those edited
by white people (and white men in particular) have been more fully preserved,
and therefore, are more accessible to researchers. As a result, until relatively
recently, these newspapers — and the efforts of the white men who edited them
— have dominated historical accounts of the abolitionist movement.2 However,
in the past decade or so, scholars3 have worked to highlight the leadership role
of the Black press in the movement. This has resulted in new and necessary
historical narratives that confirm the central role played by the Black press in
the fight against slavery and in support of liberation broadly conceived.
But there is more work to be done. Intersectional approaches to the study of
abolition have highlighted the role of women, and Black women in particular,
in the movement’s vanguard. Citing newspapers edited by women, both Black
and white, among other sources, Manisha Sinha, for example, makes the case
that “women were abolition’s foot­soldiers and, more controversially, its leaders
and orators”.5 This work dovetails with the past several decades of scholarship
on nineteenth­century Black women’s activism, which has demonstrated how
Black women emerged as “visible and authoritative community leaders” over
the course of the nineteenth century.6 Yet it has been generally understood that
2

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

this emergence was gradual, with Black women securing their public presence
in the years after the Civil War.7 While recovery efforts such as the Colored
Conventions Project8 have sought to excavate evidence of how Black women
participated in early conversations about abolition and related issues of social,
economic, and educational justice, it is still often necessary to “read between
the lines” of the archival record “for echoes of women’s contributions” to the
abolitionist movement, as Derrick Spires explains.9
This project shares the commitment of the sources cited above to amplifying
the leadership contributions of Black people, and Black women in particular, to
the abolitionist cause. But we diverge in our methodological approach. Rather
than seek out additional archival sources that might augment existing accounts
of social and political leadership — in terms of either thought, or action, or
both — or “read between the lines” of existing documents so as to generate new
narratives about who exemplified leadership in its various forms, we focus on
the micro­structure of the language of the archive. We hypothesize that aspects
of social and political leadership — more specifically, the introduction of new
concepts, the reframing of existing ones, and the advancement and circulation
of both — can be identified in the appearance of individual words and the statis­
tics that describe their lexical contexts. By connecting these words and contexts
to the specific newspapers in which they appear, we offer a new layer of evi­
dence about the emergence of certain social and political currents, the sources
responsible for their transmission, and the networks that helped sustain them.
Contextual accounts of the meaning of words, such as the one just described,
are known in linguistics as distributional semantics.10 Through computational
analysis of large text corpora, this contextual information can be summarized in
the form of numerical vectors known as word embeddings, which have been
shown to provide a powerful measure of changes in the meaning of individ­
ual terms,11 as well as an index of deeper social dynamics.12 For these rea­
sons, word embeddings have attracted growing interest in the digital humanities,
where they have been applied to identify the evolution of concepts13 and offer
a “lexical panorama” of a particular discourse.14 We go further by adding a
3

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

network perspective to the dynamics of word meaning: we ask not only which
individual words have changed in meaning and how they have changed, but
also who was responsible for those changed meanings and how that responsibil­
ity was expressed. We propose a method of identifying the specific newspapers
that were responsible for introducing new or changed meanings of words into
the surrounding discourse, as well as the newspapers which quickly adopted
those new or changed usages. To do so, we develop a model of semantic change
and a measure of semantic leadership that links each word in the corpus to a pair
of newspapers: a leader and a follower. We then aggregate over hundreds of
semantic changes to construct a network between the set of newspapers in our
collection. The analysis of this network reveals the specific roles played by each
newspaper in the evolving discourse of abolitionism. This novel computational
approach offers a counterweight, however imperfect, to the forces of power that
operate along the lines of both race and gender, and that have overdetermined
much of the historical scholarship on the abolitionist press to this point.15
We find that two newspapers edited by women — The Provincial Freeman and
The Lily — played a leading role in a large number of semantic changes in our
corpus. That the former is an abolitionist newspaper edited by a Black woman,
and the latter is a women’s suffrage newspaper edited by a white woman, lends
additional credence to the argument that a multiracial coalition of women led the
abolitionist movement in terms of both thought and action. In addition, it con­
tributes additional complexity to the scholarship that has sought to tease apart
the relation of the abolitionist movement to the women’s suffrage movement,
and the vexed racial politics that characterize their relation.16 By aggregating
this evidence of semantic leadership into a weighted network, with the news­
papers as nodes and the number of their lead words as edge weights, we reveal
additional pathways of semantic influence. More specifically, we find evidence
to confirm extant accounts of the leadership role played by The Liberator, a
white­edited newspaper, as well as new insight into the leadership relationships
among newspapers associated with the Black press. Our methods of valida­
tion, which involve both qualitative and quantitative analysis, demonstrate how
4

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

this evidence might be incorporated back into existing scholarly conversations
about nineteenth­century freedom struggles. More generally, our results sug­
gest that our model of semantic leadership might be applied to other incomplete
or otherwise fragmentary archives, thereby contributing to the rebalancing of
the historical narratives that the archives prompt.

Lexical Semantic Change and Leadership
Our methodological approach draws on both semantic and sociolinguistic per­
spectives on language change, which have rarely been reconciled in prior work.
This may be due in part to each subfield’s preferred sources of data: seman­
tic change is studied mainly from diachronic corpora of written texts, which
typically have limited social information, while sociolinguistic research is built
mainly on interviews, with temporal changes inferred from each speaker’s age.17
Because our newspaper corpus (described more fully in Data) is large and di­
achronic, and contains sources that were known to have been in conversation,
we are able to take a step towards unifying these perspectives in a novel mod­
eling framework (described in Method: From timestamped text to aggregate
influence networks). To set the stage for this work, we now review the key
foundations of our modeling framework before summarizing our methodologi­
cal contributions.

Lexical semantic change
Languages undergo constant change, and even an intuitive reflection on a word
like awesome makes clear that this instability extends to the lexicon, which
links words and their semantics.18 Lexical semantic changes can be identified
in corpora by building on the theory of distributional semantics,19 which asserts
that the meaning of a linguistic element can be ascertained by the contexts in
which it appears. Consequently, if a word undergoes a change in the distribu­
tion over contexts — in its distributional statistics — then its meaning is likely
to have changed as well. In contemporary computational linguistics, distribu­
5

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

tional statistics are summarized by vector word embeddings, which are usually
estimated by maximizing a probability model on a corpus.20 In the past sev­
eral years, word embeddings have begun to be applied in digital humanities
research.21 By making word embeddings dynamic, they can be powerful tools
for revealing changes in word meaning.22 A typical approach is to estimate
embeddings on multiple corpora from different time periods and then align the
embedding vectors to make them comparable; however, there are many alterna­
tives.23
After identifying lexical semantic changes, we next ask what can be learned
from them in aggregate. Hamilton, Leskovec, and Jurafsky24 treat diachronic
word embeddings as evidence for structural constraints on semantic change,
while Garg et al.25 trace shifts in public attitudes towards race and ethnicity by
tracking word embeddings in large­scale corpora of books. In the digital human­
ities, diachronic word embeddings have been used to trace the history of con­
cepts: for example, Shechtman26 explores the “technical, ideological, and envi­
ronmental valences” of the idea of media by comparing near neighbors of me­
dia and related terms across a corpus of 20th century magazines. Most closely
related to our own work, Soni, Lerman, and Eisenstein27 present a method for
identifying the specific documents that lead lexical semantic changes, which the
authors show to accrue more citations in corpora of scientific abstracts and legal
opinions. This work provides further evidence for the validity of our approach
of linking lexical semantic leadership to broader influence. Methodologically,
we diverge from this prior work by identifying leaders of individual semantic
changes, and then computing and analyzing aggregate leadership networks over
hundreds of changes.

The leaders of language change and their social networks
The search for leaders of language change is a core concern of sociolinguis­
tics, which seeks to identify groups of people who tend to be in the linguistic
vanguard.28 A robust finding from this literature is that women tend to lead lan­
guage change, particularly in phonology (the sound system) and in grammar.29
6

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

This type of sociolinguistic research relies heavily on the method of apparent
time:30 first, identify changes in progress by comparing the speech of younger
and older individuals; then, identify individuals whose speech is better aligned
with that of younger people, which implies that they were among the earlier
adopters of the change. The key assumption is that each person’s use of lan­
guage is stable throughout their adult life, a hypothesis that has been broadly
supported by prior work on changes in phonology and grammar.31 Here, how­
ever, we focus on changes in word meaning, where there is less evidence in favor
of adult stability.32 We therefore provide real­time evidence from a diachronic
corpus, and we identify many changes in the lexical semantics of individual
editors.
Methodologically, we analyze language change in the context of a social net­
work. Prior work in sociolinguistics has linked the network characteristics of
individuals with their positioning with respect to language change: for example,
Labov33 argues that individuals with many weak ties tend to be leaders, while
Milroy34 finds that dense sub­networks of strong ties tend to resist language
change. Our focus is not on characterizing the social networks of the leaders of
language change, but on aggregating dyadic leader­follower relationships into
an overall summary of the pathways of innovation in a community of news­
papers. More closely related is computational research on lexical innovations
in Twitter: Eisenstein et al.35 construct a network of sociolinguistic influence
between cities in the United States, and Goel et al.36 model the structural char­
acteristics of influence events between individual Twitter users. Both of these
studies are based on the frequencies of lexical items, rather than changes in their
meanings. Beyond sociolinguistics, there have been a number of attempts to
quantify influence in text corpora, largely from researchers in computer science
and machine learning. Some approaches operate at the level of individual word
frequencies: for example, Guo et al.37 measure influence within small groups
by the use of individual words, on the assumption that Alice is likely to have
influenced Bob if words used by Alice tend to be subsequently used by Bob.
Kelly et al.38 apply this idea to a dataset of patents, finding that the most in­
7

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

fluential patents (in terms of citations and market value) are those whose word
distributions are distinct from prior documents, but similar to subsequent docu­
ments. Topic models39 have also been used to measure influence in networks:40
in a humanities context, Barron et al.41 apply a topic­based analysis to speeches
from the French revolution, identifying as influencers those individuals whose
topic distributions were distinct from the past and similar to the future. All of
these methods focus on changes in which words are used, rather than how they
are used. While lexical frequencies can be informative — particularly in cases
that fit theoretical models like communicative accomodation theory42 — they
are often caused by outside events (e.g., new people or keywords) rather than
conceptual changes in the discourse.
To summarize, prior work in sociolinguistics has been concerned largely with
phonology and morphosyntax, while computational researchers have focused
on the frequency of words or topics. In contrast, we study changes in the mean­
ings of words, as quantified by diachronic word embeddings that summarize the
changing contexts in which those words appear. Such changes are especially rel­
evant to questions of social and political influence in a networked discourse —
as in the various groups involved in the abolitionist movement of the nineteenth­
century United States. For example, it has long been argued that Black Amer­
icans, both those enslaved and those free, helped to expand the idea of what
freedom properly entails.43 While freedom, in the nineteenth century, was ini­
tially understood in terms of legal emancipation — a conception formulated by
white abolitionists fixated on ending slavery — Black Americans of that same
era understood freedom as much more capacious, encompassing ideas about so­
cial, economic, and educational justice, as well as liberation broadly conceived.
Is it possible to detect a signal that tracks this conceptual change? And if so,
is it possible to determine who in the corpus was responsible for advancing
and/or popularizing the expanded conception of the term? Our method allows
us to explore these questions from a semantic and statistical perspective: we
can test whether words like freedom really did undergo semantic change in the
documents in our newspaper corpus; identify the specific newspaper that led
8

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

those changes; and aggregate across individual changes to an overall summary
of lexical semantic leadership. This aggregate measure functions as a proxy
for overall linguistic influence in the corpus, taking into account the influence
of known words and phrases, like freedom, as well as other terms that might
not otherwise invite attention in a manual analysis. The resulting network pro­
vides a new way of understanding the relationships among the newspapers that
document this pivotal era in the history of the United States.

Summary of technical contributions
The work described in this paper builds upon these efforts to model semantic
changes and aggregate them into a summary network. We enhance prior di­
achronic word embedding techniques by incorporating metadata about the news­
papers that serve as the source of word occurrence. We then compute the lead or
lag of each source with respect to each semantic change. These lead­lag pairs
are then aggregated into a network of semantic leadership, which we analyze to
arrive at a new understanding of the roles of each newspaper in the linguistic
changes that accompanies the evolving discourse on the abolition of slavery in
the United States. To summarize, we make three methodological contributions:
1. We propose a text modeling approach to identify semantic leadership in
a corpus of timestamped documents from a set of sources, such as news­
papers. As described in the following section, this approach includes (a)
a model to identify semantic changes in language using diachronic word
embeddings, and (b) a statistical measure to quantify the extent to which
each source led others in the adoption of each change.
2. We apply this method to a corpus of nineteenth­century newspapers dig­
itized by Accessible Archives.44 We extract the words that changed in
meaning during the period between 1827 to 1865, the period bounded by
the publication of the first known abolitionist newspaper and the ratifi­
cation of the Emancipation Proclamation. We then quantify the lead­lag
relationships between the newspapers for each of these changes.
9

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

3. We aggregate the dyadic relationships between newspapers into a weighted
semantic leadership network, retaining links between newspapers for each
semantic change only if the relationship is so strong as to be highly un­
likely to have arisen by chance. We then apply two metrics for holistic
network analysis — PageRank45 and Hyperlink Induced Topic Search
(HITS)46 — to identify the specific roles of each newspaper as a leader,
follower, or outsider in the evolving discourse of abolitionism.

Method: From timestamped text to aggregate influence net­
works
This section describes our method in more detail. We first describe a model to
learn diachronic word embeddings from text, then augment the model to learn
diachronic word embeddings that are conditional on the newspapers and which
can be used to statistically measure the lead of one newspaper over other, and
finally propose a scheme to aggregate the lead­lag relationships of newspapers
and quantify their influence.
Mathematical notation. We define a document as a sequence of discrete to­
kens (words) from a finite vocabulary V, so that document i is denoted wi =
(wi,1 , wi,2 , . . . , wi,ni ), with ni indicating the length of document i. We define a
corpus as a set of N documents, W = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wN }. Each document is
associated with a discrete time ti and source label si . The time is created by bin­
ning the document timestamps into T bins; there are S sources, corresponding
to each of the newspapers in the collection. The specific newspapers and time
bins are described in the following section.

Word embeddings
Our approach builds on word embeddings, which represent each word in the
vocabulary as a vector of real numbers.47 We estimate the embeddings by opti­
mizing the classical skipgram objective, in which embeddings are parameters
10

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

in a model of the probability of each word token conditioned on its neighbor­
ing tokens.48 While the method is well known, the details are relevant to the
innovative aspects of our methodology, so we review them briefly. Omitting
the document index i, the skipgram objective is based on the probability,
!
"
P(wj! | wj ) ∝ exp vwj! · uwj ,
(1)

where vwj! is the “output” embedding of wj! , and uwj is the “input” embedding of
wj . Each v and u is a vector, which is estimated by maximizing the product of
these probabilities across all nearby pairs of tokens (wj , wj! ). The result is that
words that appear in similar contexts tend to have similar embedding vectors,
which is the essence of the theory of distributional semantics.49 We focus on
the input embeddings u, as in most of the prior applications of the skipgram
embedding model to digital humanities research.50

Identifying semantic changes
The skipgram embedding model is not equipped to use metadata such as times
associated with the tokens. However, Bamman, Dyer, and Smith51 proposed
an extension to specialize the embeddings accounting for any discrete labels
attached to each token. The core idea of their approach is to decompose the input
embedding of a word as a sum of two embeddings — a base embedding and a
residual embedding. Though originally developed to learn distinct embeddings
of words based on geography, we apply it to learn diachronic embeddings.52 To
do this, we discretize time into T bins, with ti ∈ 1 . . . T indicating the time bin
for document i. Then if w appears at position j in document i, the following
input embedding is substituted in Equation 1.
u(twii,j) = bwi,j + r(twii,j) ,

(2)
(t )

where bwi,j is the base embedding of the word wi,j and rwii,j is the residual for time
ti . The base embedding represents the elements of meaning that do not change
over time; the residual embeddings are specialized for the contexts encountered
11

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

Figure 2: Semantic change in cabinet. The embeddings of cabinet and its near neighbors are projected to two
dimensions using singular value decomposition. The embeddings of the target word indicate meaning shift from
the architectural uses to political uses. This is reflected in the position of the embedding but even more so in the
change in near neighbors.

at each temporal epoch, making it possible to model semantic change. To ensure
that the base embedding is used to account for the time­invariant components of
meaning, the residual embeddings are regularized by adding an l2 penalty to the
# # (t)
skipgram objective, corresponding to the sum of squared values, Vw Tt (rw )2 .
This encourages the estimator to choose values of r that are close to zero unless
a strong temporal signal is observed.
We focus on terms whose embeddings change substantially over time. Among
many possible ways to quantify change in embeddings,53 we apply the method
from Hamilton, Leskovec, and Jurafsky,54 in which the words are ranked for se­
mantic change by computing the difference in the similarity of their neighbors
over time in the embedding space. Because we have multiple time bins, we ex­
tend this method by computing the differences between neighbors for all pairs
of times in T for every word and pick the interval that has the maximum dif­
ference as the measure of semantic change in the word. Words are then ranked
based on this measure, yielding an ordered list of changes as tuples of words
and timestamps.
Figure 2 provides an example: the term cabinet enters the corpus being used
in the (now) archaic sense to describe a small storage room, as in a cabinet of
curiosities; but in the final years of the corpus, fully shifts to reflect its usage
12

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

in the political sense, as in the context of a president’s Cabinet (other changes
pertinent to abolition are described below in the section Semantic changes). As
a measure of the validity of our approach, many changes refer to entities and
concepts from the Civil War, such as ferry (later referring to Harper’s Ferry),
confederates (acquiring a specialized meaning after the formation of the Con­
federacy), and battery (from an assault to an array of guns). Changes referring
to specific named entities were filtered at a later stage.
Our approach of modeling semantic changes has three main advantages. First,
as a joint model of words and time, it does not require the computationally
expensive post­alignment of the word embeddings that is common in standard
approaches.55 Second, temporal embeddings can be learned even for words that
emerge or disappear before the start or end of the time period respectively —
these are just the base embeddings. Finally, the model is easily extended to
incorporate other metadata about the text if available, as described in the next
section.

Finding semantic leaders
Language changes are not adopted by everyone at the same time: for any change
there are leaders, followers, and individuals who resist the change altogether.
Moreover, being a leader for one semantic change does not imply semantic lead­
ership for all changes.56 We are interested in identifying who led and followed
in each semantic change. To do this, we augment the diachronic embedding
model to include an additional term for the source of each token — that is, the
newspaper in which the token appears. The underlying input embedding repre­
sentation can then be written,
u(twii,j,si ) = bwi,j + r(twii,j) + r(twii,j,si ) ,
(t ,s )

(3)

where rwii,j i is the source­specific temporal deviation added to the temporal and
atemporal components of the input embedding. As before we apply l2 regular­
(t,s)
ization to the residual terms, which ensures that rw = 0 for words that are not
13

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

used by source s at time t.
The fully conditioned embeddings are then used to assign a leadership score
between a pair of sources for a given change (w, t1 , t2 ), where t1 < t2 are the
timestamps of a change in the meaning of word w. For each pair of sources, s1
and s2 , we calculate two quantities: first, the similarity in meaning of the word
for s1 with s2 at the two different times and, second, the similarity in meaning
of the word for s2 at the two different times. A measure of the lead of source s1
over s2 is the ratio of vector inner products,
(t ,s1 )

Lead(s1 → s2 , w, t1 , t2 ) =

uw1

(t ,s2 )

uw1

(t ,s2 )

· uw2

(t ,s2 )

· uw2

(4)

A higher score indicates more leadership, with a score of 1 corresponding to a
baseline case of no leadership. For more intuition, consider a few cases:
• If s1 is indeed leading s2 on w, then s1 ’s use of the word with the new mean­
ing should precede that of s2 . Equation 4 checks this precisely by com­
paring cross­source similarity (the numerator) with self­similarity (the
denominator) in meaning across the two times. If the numerator is larger
than the denominator, then s1 is likely to have used the word with the new
meaning before s2 adopted it. Conversely, if the denominator is larger,
then s2 has not followed s1 in its use of this word.
• If w does not change in meaning, then no newspaper should be deemed a
leader.This is reflected in our measure because the numerator is unlikely
to significantly exceed the denominator in this case.
(t ,s )

• If a source si does not publish at time ti , then rwi i = 0. This means that
(t ,s )
uwi i will be identical to the global average at time ti , and therefore si can
be neither a strong leader or follower.
• Suppose w changes in meaning between time t1 and t2 , but both s1 and
s2 reach the new meaning in synchrony, as may happen if the change in
14

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

meaning is caused by a sudden external event. In this case, s1 and s2
would both use an older sense of the word at t1 and then switch to the
newer sense at t2 . The numerator and denominator in Equation 4 will be
approximately equal, resulting in a leadership measure close to 1.
We focus on the changes that took place over adjacent time periods, which are
most likely to be indicative of inter­newspaper transmission. For each word in
each successive temporal interval over the entire timespan, we calculated the
lead of each newspaper over each of the others. We identified the two news­
papers (one leader, one follower) that produced the maximum lead score and
retained the pair if it passed the threshold obtained from the randomization pro­
cedure described below.

Controlling for random noise and dataset artifacts
In any finite dataset, there will be spurious correlations, which may appear to
be meaningful due only to random noise. In our dataset, there is added risk
due to two sources of heterogeneity of the data. As shown in Figure 3, some
newspapers publish towards the beginning of the dataset (from 1831) and others
towards the end (1861­1865); furthermore, the corpus overall contains more
text published in the years leading up to the Civil War. Second, the number and
length of the articles published by each newspaper are widely divergent. While
this heterogeneity reflects the reality of the historical trajectory of newspaper
publishing at the time,57 it is potentially problematic: a statistical analysis of
temporal trends might inherently focus on the newspapers that publish early and
often as leaders, simply due to temporal precedence; similarly, newspapers that
publish in greater volume may play an outsize role in determining the temporal
(t )
word embeddings uwij , so that our assessment of semantic leadership will be
most sensitive to changes in the words that these newspapers emphasize.
While these issues can be partially mitigated by limiting the number of tokens
per newspaper at each time step, additional controls are necessary due to the
temporal heterogeneity of the data. We use randomization to control for both
15

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

structural heterogeneity and random noise. We create a set of K = 100 ran­
domized datasets, in which word tokens are randomly swapped between news­
papers. This preserves the structure of the dataset — each newspaper has the
same number of tokens within each time period — but it breaks the link between
individual newspapers and contextual word statistics. Any leadership relation­
ships that are detected in such a randomized dataset must be attributed to either
structural bias or random noise, because the word tokens have been assigned to
individual newspapers at random.
To see how these randomized datasets help us to control for noise and hetero­
geneity, recall that a leadership event is a tuple (s1 → s2 , w, t1 , t2 ), where s1
and s2 are newspaper sources, w is a word, and t1 and t2 are timestamps. For
each such event, we compute the leadership statistic from Equation 4 in each
randomized dataset, yielding a set of values {Lead(k) (s1 → s2 , w, t1 , t2 )} for
k ∈ 1 . . . K. We can then compare these values with the score that was observed
in the original, nonrandomized dataset. Our final set of influence events is the
set of tuples such that,
!
"
(k)
K
Lead(s1 → s2 , w, t1 , t2 ) > Φ.95 {Lead (s1 → s2 , w, t1 , t2 )}k=1 , (5)

where the function Φ.95 (S) selects the 95th percentile value of the set S; as a
special case, Φ.5 (S) is the median of S. This procedure is based on principles
from statistical significance testing,58 and allows us to approximately bound the
probability of each leadership score arising by chance.59

Aggregated semantic influence network
To generalize from individual leadership events, we aggregate the events into a
semantic leadership network among the newspapers. Specifically, we construct
an edge­weighted network, G = (S, E), where, as before, S is the set of news­
papers that form the nodes in the network, and every e ∈ E is a weighted edge,
denoted e = (s1 → s2 , c12 ), with c12 indicating the number of words for which
s2 leads s1 .
16

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

We interrogate the structure of this aggregate influence network using two graph­
theoretic measures. The first is pagerank, which computes the overall centrality
of each node in the network;60 however, as we will see, this single measure fails
to distinguish three cases of interest: newspapers that usually lead, newspapers
that usually follow, and newspapers that generally do not engage with the rest
of the network. For this reason, we perform a more fine­grained analysis using
the HITS metrics of hubs and authorities.61 While details of these algorithms
can be found in network analysis textbooks,62 we give brief descriptions here.

Pagerank. The principle behind pagerank is that the importance of a node is
a function of the importance of the nodes that link to it (its “backlinks”). In our
context, each edge s1 → s2 is weighted by the number of innovations in which
s2 led s1 , and then this weight is normalized by the sum of weights on edges
from s1 . This means that a newspaper has high pagerank if it leads other high
pagerank newspapers, and particularly if it is the sole (or main) leader of those
newspapers. Mathematically, the pagerank of node i is given by:
Pageranki = α

$
j

A
# ij Pagerankj + β,
k Akj

(6)

where Aij is the weight on the edge from j to i (number of words for which i leads
j), Pagerankj is the pagerank of node j, and α and β are additional free parame­
ters.63 This formulation is recursive: the pagerank of each node is computed in
terms of the pageranks of the other nodes. The overall pagerank problem can be
formulated as a system of linear equations (one for each node), and these equa­
tions can be solved simultaneously by factorization of the matrix A. Pagerank
has been used in prior work in the digital humanities,64 and is closely related to
eigenvector centrality, which is used more widely in the social sciences.65

HITS. A limitation of pagerank is that it assigns only a single importance
score to any newspaper, which fails to differentiate followers from newspapers
17

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

that simply do not participate in ongoing semantic changes. We therefore turn
to a more fine­grained analysis technique. HITS, which stands for hyperlink­
induced topic search, is another linear algebra­based network centrality algo­
rithm, which decomposes central nodes into two complementary groups, au­
thorities and hubs. Authorities are those nodes that are pointed to by high­
scoring hubs, and conversely, hubs are nodes that point to high­scoring authori­
ties. In our context, high scores as an authority and hub indicate the importance
of a newspaper as a leader and follower respectively.
Mathematically, the authority and the hub score for a node i can be given by the
paired equations,

Authorityi = α

$

Aij Hubj ,

(7)

Aji Authorityj ,

(8)

j

Hubi = β

$
j

where Aij is the weight on the edge from j to i (number of words for which i
leads j), Authorityi is the authority score of node i, Hubi is the hub score of node
i.66 Similar to pagerank, HITS also originated with the application of ranking
webpages in a hyperlinked environment, but it has been increasingly used in
information sciences67 and digital humanities.68

Data
We analyze a subset of nineteenth century newspapers digitized and hand­keyed
by Accessible Archives.69 We obtained permission to scrape the contents of sev­
eral of Accessible Archives’s collections, including ”African American News­
papers,” the ”Women’s Suffrage Collection,” and several individual titles. Each
newspaper in the archive consists of multiple issues, and each issue contains
multiple articles. Each article is encoded as a unique
page. We extracted
18

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

the text from each page using
package in python, following
70
a process similar to Klein, Eisenstein, and Sun. We further process the data
using the methods described below.

Contents and Metadata
For the purposes of this study, we limit our corpus to the period between March
1827, the date of the earliest newspaper in our collection, and December 1865,
which marks the ratification of the Emancipation Proclamation. Most newspa­
pers in our collection published weekly, though some titles are monthly publi­
cations. The temporal distribution of the newspapers in our collection is given
in Figure 3, and a detailed description of the newspapers is found in Table 1.
The collection is temporally skewed: the later years have more newspapers and
more articles. This reflects a general trend in the rise in abolitionist newspapers
published in the United States,71 as well as the influence of scholarship on the
subject, which has focused on specific titles published in the final decades of
our study, leading to their being digitized more quickly and more completely
than other less­known works.72

19

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

Title

First Issue

Description

Freedom’s Journal

1827

The Liberator

1831

The Colored Ameri­
can

1837

National Anti­Slavery
Standard

1840

The Douglass Papers

1847

The National Era

1847

The Christian
Recorder

1854

Provincial Freeman

1854

The Lily

1849

Godey’s Lady’s Book

1830

Frank Leslie’s Weekly

1855

An abolitionist newspaper established by two Black clergymen, Samuel
E. Cornish and John Brown Russworm. The earliest newspaper edited by
and for Black Americans presently known.
An abolitionist newspaper established by William Lloyd Garrison, the
famed white abolitionist. It was known for its fiery rhetoric and is consid­
ered among the most influential papers of its day.
An abolitionist newspaper established by Phillip A. Bell as The Weekly
Advocate. Samuel Cornish, of Freedom’s Journal, became its editor sev­
eral months later, and initiated the name change. The Colored American
was intended to serve as a national publication edited by and for Black
Americans.
The official newspaper of the majority­white American Anti­Slavery
Society. The author and abolitionist Lydia Maria Child was its first editor.
It was intended to serve as a more moderate counterpart to The Liberator,
and appeal to a white reading public.
A set of abolitionist newspapers edited Frederick Douglass, the author
and orator who liberated himself from slavery. The North Star was
launched in 1847, with Martin Delaney as co­editor. Douglass renamed
it Frederick Douglass’s Paper upon Delaney’s departure in 1851. After a
several year pause, Douglass launched Douglass’s Monthly in 1859.
A more general newspaper, founded by Dr. Gamaliel Bailey, Jr. and
aimed at a white audience. It supported the cause of abolition, and is
most famous for being the first to publish Uncle Tom’s Cabin.
A newspaper established by the African Methodist Episcopal (AME)
Church. Once overlooked for its contributions to abolition, it is now
understood as central to the movement for Black liberation in the nine­
teenth century.
An abolitionist newspaper established by Mary Ann Shadd, a Black
abolitionist, educator, and later lawyer, who emigrated from the US to
Canada. The Freeman is believed to be the first newspaper edited by a
Black woman in all of North America.
The first known women’s suffrage newspaper founded by Amelia
Bloomer, who was white. Its initial emphasis was on the temperance
movement, but it became more invested in women’s rights over time.
A monthly women’s magazine edited by a white woman, Sarah Josepha
Hale, for the majority of its run. It was rarely overtly political. It is
included in the corpus as a point of comparison with The Lily.
A weekly magazine aimed at a white reading public. It offered a wide
range of content, and is best known for its literary selections and cover­
age of current events. It is included in this corpus as a point of compari­
son to both the abolitionist and suffragist papers of the same era.

Table 1: Detailed description of all newspaper titles. We include Freedom’s Journal in identifying semantic
changes but exclude it from the subsequent analysis because its publication stopped very early in the timeframe
that we considered.

The focus of this study is on the abolitionist movement of the nineteenth­century
20

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Figure 3: The distribution of data in Accessible archives, after further processing to remove duplication and
fixing digital errors, that is used for analysis in the rest of the paper.

United States. This is reflected in the titles included in our corpus, the majority
of which explicitly identify as abolitionist newspapers. Our corpus is notable
for its relatively equal number of Black­edited and white­edited abolitionist ti­
tles; this was among the reasons we selected Accessible Archives as our original
data source. Accessible Archives also provides information about the race and
gender of the editors of each newspaper, as well as about the paper’s intended
audience; we confirmed the identity of each editor and each newspaper’s audi­
ence with a second scholarly source, and then converted this information into
additional metadata for use in the project. During this period, most newspa­
pers were associated with a small group of editors (on the order of one to three
people), which remained relatively constant over the newspaper’s run, and who
exerted a high degree of control over the newspaper’s contents.73
For this project, we supplemented the abolitionist titles with additional newspa­
pers linked to the women’s suffrage movement, so as to enable a comparison
between the two movements, which were often linked. We have also included
21

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

a more general newspaper of that same era, as well as two monthly magazines.
Our rationale for including these titles was to provide a baseline for any claims
about abolition (or women’s rights) that we might make. While this dataset is
far from exhaustive, it represents a meaningful “scholarly edition of a literary
system,” as Katherine Bode might describe it, one which captures some of the
key titles in the scholarship on the subject along with known interlocutors and
additional likely influences.74 For more on the history of these newspapers, see
Gross and Kelley.75

Data Processing
Digital error correction. While Accessible Archives’ hand­keyed texts are
far less error­prone than those digitized using optical character recognition(OCR),76
we discovered several types of errors in the course of our analysis. One com­
mon source of error in this collection is whitespace.77 Such errors, also known
as word segmentation errors or spacing errors, arise during both OCR and the
post­digitization handling of the data78 — the latter being the source of the error
in the Accessible Archives corpus — and result in the elimination of whites­
pace between words. This leads to out­of­vocabulary items like senatoradmits
and endowedwith. Our approach to correcting these errors is described in prior
work.79

Deduplication. The collection also contains a number of articles that were
reprinted verbatim from other newspapers (e.g. mission statements, notices,
speeches) as well as many that were reprinted with minor modifications (e.g.
advertisement campaigns, commodity price reports). While these reprinted arti­
cles are an artifact of the time,80 their presence in the corpus is problematic for
modeling, potentially resulting in false positive semantic changes. As a conser­
vative heuristic, we remove from the corpus all articles that share a contiguous
sequence of eight or more words with another article. Though this heuristic can
also remove a number of non­duplicate articles, we apply it because it does not
affect the distribution of the documents temporally or across newspapers, and
22

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

keeps roughly 90,000 articles in the corpus.

Data and experimental setup. For all the analysis, we divide the corpus into
ten equal time intervals.81 Newspapers that do not contain at least 500 arti­
cles throughout their tenure in the period of interest are ignored. To maximize
the number of newspapers that meet this condition, we group together several
smaller newspapers that share an editor. Namely, we consolidate The North
Star, Frederick Douglass’s Paper, and the Douglass Monthly into a single source
we label Douglass Papers, because each was edited by the Black abolitionist and
orator Frederick Douglass; we also group The Weekly Advocate with The Col­
ored American, since the former changed its name to the latter several months
into its publication run.

Vocabulary and hyperparameters. All the text is lowercased before process­
ing. The vocabulary is limited to the 50,000 most frequent words in the corpus.
The embedding size for all the models is set to 100 dimensions. The window
size to determine the context words is set to 5 in both directions. The #2 regu­
larization penalty is set to 1e−4 .

Results
Our method offers insights about the evolution of conceptual terms related to
abolition, as well as about the specific newspapers that contributed to the spread
of the terms’ changed meanings. By considering these terms in relation to others
identified by the model as associated with particular newspapers, we elaborate
an argument about the nature of semantic leadership and its relation to social
and political influence within our newspaper corpus. We also discuss the sig­
nificance of the overall influence network generated by our model, which con­
firms aspects of our previous understanding of the movement’s intellectual lead­
ers and followers, while illuminating additional pathways of influence among
23

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

some of the understudied newspapers in our corpus. Taken together, these re­
sults help to establish the validity of our method and, we hope, will seed new
research questions about these important newspapers, the relationships among
them, and their significance for our understanding of the abolitionist movement.
We now discuss the findings that result from each phase of our methodological
pipeline, building towards the conclusion about women’s leadership and the role
of the Black press.

Semantic changes
The first step in our method identifies terms that undergo semantic change. Il­
lustrative examples are documented in Table 2. The word equality, in its earli­
est usage in the corpus (1827­1831), seems to express the idea of equality in a
Lockean sense. It is nearest in meaning to other key terms in the Enlightenment
discourse of natural rights, such as liberty, rights, wisdom, and mankind — the
same terms that were commonplace at the time of the nation’s founding, and
into the early years of the republic. Over time, however, the usage of the term
becomes more connected to questions of the practice of democracy. Although it
retains some of its original associations, by 1857 equality also becomes closely
associated with the idea of self­government issues of suffrage, and the specific
guarantees of the ideals expressed in nation’s founding documents. While this
shift from abstract to concrete is often attributed to the authors of the nation’s
founding documents, as they attempted to translate political philosophy into a
governing structure, it is interesting to observe that in the abolitionist press (and
related publications), the shift happens several decades later. Could it reflect a
concerted effort, on the part of the abolitionist press, to first frame the issue of
slavery in philosophical terms before recognizing that slavery’s abolition might
require a more concrete argument? Could it reflect the growing influence of
the women’s suffrage movement, which seized upon equality as its governing
ideological principle? While the changing meaning of equality does not of­
fer a definitive answer to these questions, it helps point to how the changing
meanings of individual words, as documented in our corpus, can index larger
24

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Word

From

Until

Earlier examples

Later examples

cabinet

1831­1835

1861­1865

a cabinet of antiquities
the secret cabinet on the right

president and his cabinet
members of the cabinet

equality

1827­1831

1853­1857

liberty and equality to all
blessed with liberty and equality

the equality of the races
an equality with the whites

freedom

1827­1831

1857­1861

the spirit of freedom is marching

opposition of slavery to freedom
continues
colored man for freedom and
self­government
advocate the rights of the black
man
the rights of women

rights

1841­1845

1861­1865

establish their freedom from
being sold
inalienable rights of man

justice

1831­1835

1861­1865

legislature or the court of justice

immediate

1827­1831

1849­1853

fight

1827­1831

1849­1853

service

1831­1835

1861­1865

james madison and chief justice
marshall
the immediate legislation of
congress
the immediate extinction of
slavery
you are paid to fight
a fight took place
first military service was in
corsica
their service in the army

gallant service at fort wagner

state fugitive aid society
liberal offers to aid the cause of
freedom
republic is growing darker
everyday
stole the growing light of dawn

aid

1831­1835

1861­1865

offers of aid from colonizationists
gave them aid and tyrants fled

growing

1835­1839

1861­1865

growing up in shame and poverty

writing

1827­1831

1853­1857

hoped

1841­1845

1845­1849

courage

1827­1831

1849­1853

one simple act of justice to the
slave
emancipation as an act of justice
and humanity
hostile to immediate emancipa­
tion
safety of immediate uncondi­
tional emancipation
profess to fight for liberty
determination to fight till the last

extreme want growing out of the
toil
coloured adults in reading, writ­
ing, arithmetic
reading or writing the letters
seem
it is hoped that every newspaper
it was hoped however that the
friends of temperance
possessed of both sense and
courage
wit and courage amongst all

service was held in the church

the writing is blotted in many
places
full of writing in a round­text
hand
promised and hoped for but
homeless future
he now hoped to have peace
renewed courage instead of the
hopeless feeling of banishment
personal courage and devotion

Table 2: Examples of semantic changes. The terms are detected to have changed most in meaning from the
earlier timespan to the later.

25

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

ideological changes and debates.
The term freedom follows a similar, if more chronologically consistent shift
from abstract to concrete. It enters the corpus with general associations to the
nation’s foundational ideals. Its near neighbors include words like humanity,
people, and country. By the time of beginning of the Civil War, however, the
associations of the term have become more specific, including references to both
liberty and slavery, as well as terms that reference arguments about the rights
and guarantees of the nation that should ensure freedom, as well as the insti­
tutions that should enforce it. With respect to the term rights, we find that this
term also moves from a more abstract to a more concrete meaning, tracking both
freedom and equality — terms which appear in its list of near neighbors, along
with terms like humanity, which reinforce a sense of the term that is broadly
applied. Over the second half of the corpus, however, the term narrows in its
application to questions of citizenship and suffrage.
As with the questions prompted by the term equality, knowledge of which news­
paper was most responsible for this narrowed sense of the term might tell us
something about who was responsible for shifting the conversation about rights
and their application. Was it one of the newspapers edited by women? This
finding would help to confirm the argument made by Manisha Sinha, among
others, that women abolitionists were responsible for pushing the movement to
consider issues of enfranchisement and women’s rights more broadly. Or was it
one of the papers associated with the Black press? This might introduce another
facet of the argument made by Derrick Spires about how Black Americans, both
before and after emancipation, understood citizenship as a broad concept, one
that transcended any legal definition in order to incorporate civic engagement,
public expression, and mutual aid.
A final term, justice, is worth exploring in this context. Like freedom and rights,
this term also follows a trajectory that is consistent with historical scholarship
on the subject, albeit one that moves in the reverse direction from concrete to
abstract. It enters the corpus with narrow associations to the legal system, as
26

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

evidenced by near neighbors including judges, trial, offense, and crime. But by
the final years of the corpus, the term has significantly expanded, commanding
a more ideological frame. Its associations at the onset of the Civil War include
the terms liberty, equality, rights, and oppression, which tracks arguments about
how justice transformed into a much more powerful concept over the course of
the nineteenth century as a result of the criminal justice movement. In our cor­
pus, this transformation is reinforced by the appearance of the terms universal,
humanity, citizenship, and nation, which suggest the success of those who advo­
cated for criminal justice in expanding not only legal protections, but also ideas
about what justice properly entailed.
Taken together, these terms demonstrate how changes in near neighbors, cou­
pled with information about which newspapers were most responsible for those
changes, can point to a new understanding of (or, alternately, enhance existing
knowledge about) the abolitionist movement and its conceptual undercurrents.

Semantic Leadership
Of the changes discussed in the section above, two — justice and rights — were
attributable to specific newspapers. In terms of justice, interestingly, the news­
paper most closely associated with the more ideological conception of the word
was not an abolitionist newspaper at all, but rather, the women’s suffrage news­
paper, The Lily. More interesting still, it is The Liberator — the long­running
abolitionist newspaper with a reputation for its impassioned arguments against
slavery — which is identified as the most significant follower in this new usage.
Could it be that The Liberator, edited by a white abolitionist, William Lloyd
Garrison, was not as ideologically innovative as the historical narrative would
lead us to believe? We continue this line of inquiry below.
As for rights, our method identifies the two more general newspapers, both
intended for a white readership, as the leader­follower pair. In the period be­
tween 1853 and 1861, The National Era is the most responsible for narrowing
the scope of the conversation about rights from abstract and ideological to le­
27

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

gal and concrete; and it is Frank Leslie’s Weekly, a weekly magazine which
also published a wide range of content, which most closely followed this trend.
That the conversation about rights is bounded by white, general­audience news­
papers suggests that this concept, with its anchor in political philosophy, may
hold less relevance to the abolitionist press, or to women’s suffrage newspapers,
than concepts involving ideas about morality, humanity, or other more expan­
sive understandings about the implications of the persistence of slavery.
Beyond the analysis of individual words and the newspapers that lead in their
changing meanings, it is also possible to examine any two newspapers as leader­
follower pairs. Comparing two newspapers that published at the same time as
each other, and were known to be in conversation — for example, The Colored
American, a newspaper edited by a Black editorial staff which circulated among
a predominantly Black audience, and The Liberator, mentioned above, edited by
William Lloyd Garrison, who was white, and which circulated among a mixed,
if predominantly white audience — we find that The Colored American leads
on the terms immediate and fight. While not explicitly political terms, they do
suggest a tone of urgency that might surround an argument for liberation, one
which helps to further dismantle the narrative of The Liberator as the most radi­
cal of the abolitionist papers, and in the process, provides additional evidence to
support a claim that The Colored American, led by Black abolitionists, deserves
more of the credit for accelerating the fight against slavery.
When considering how newspaper pairs and the words that connect them can
open up new research questions, we might consider the leader­follower rela­
tionship between The Christian Recorder, the official newspaper of the African
Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church, and Godey’s Lady’s Book, a magazine
aimed at white women. The Christian Recorder is among the several publi­
cations of the AME Church, including The Christian Recorder that have been
posited as key sources in the emergence of a Black print culture,82 and yet The
Christian Recorder stands far to the side in our influence network, neither lead­
ing nor following many other newspapers. This suggests that the conversations
taking place in that paper were disconnected from the others — in terms of lan­
28

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Figure 4: The leader­follower newspaper pairs. The leading newspapers are shown on the left and the trailing
newspapers on the right. Each newspaper is shown as a rectangular patch with height proportional to the
number of words for which it is considered a leader (or follower). The thickness of each stripe connecting two
newspapers is proportional to the number of words between the newspapers that the stripe connects.

guage and therefore abolitionist thought. A prior thematic analysis confirms
that the articles did indeed consist mostly of religious content.83 Yet our model
detects that the paper does lead the rest of the network on the terms service and
aid. These terms clearly relate to core tenets of Christianity, but is interesting to
note that the main follower is not another abolitionist paper but instead a white
women’s magazine. This suggests an unexpected new line of inquiry: how
Christian benevolence, often framed as the contribution of white women’s in­
volvement in the abolitionist movement, was instead rooted in the Black church.
Thus far, we have considered individual newspaper pairs and the specific words
which connect them. But we can also analyze these words in aggregate. Our
method identifies 435 semantic leadership events, containing a mixture of po­
29

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

litical terms and activist language, as well as other words that are not easily
connected to any particular political or ideological stance. In fact, words like
growing and writing, hoped and courage — words which suggest generalized
movement, motion, action, and emotion — emerged with some of the high­
est leadership scores. This finding suggests that the influence detected by our
model might be better understood at the level of what might be described as
discourse, rather than at the level of individual words.
Looking at the aggregated counts of leader­follower pairs confirms this hypoth­
esis: the relationship between The Liberator and The National Anti­Slavery
Standard rises to the top of the list, with 32 words (of the 435) on which The
Liberator leads and The National Anti­Slavery Standard follows. This is a valu­
able if unsurprising result, since of all of the newspapers in our corpus, histori­
cal circumstance suggests these two titles should be in close dialogue with each
other, as they were both published by the American Anti­Slavery Society. The
relationship with the second highest count, between Godey’s Lady’s Book and
the Standard, is more surprising: the Standard was launched in no small part
to bring women around to the abolitionist cause, and a woman — the white
abolitionist and author Lydia Maria Child — edited the paper in its early years.
The topical analysis performed by Klein84 revealed that the Standard did indeed
contain more thematic content related to women, but the identification of the
Standard as a follower of Godey’s Lady’s Book provides new evidence about
the centrality of women’s issues to Standard. Intriguingly, the Standard also
follows The Provincial Freeman, an abolitionist newspaper edited by a Black
woman, in outsized degree to the Freeman’s far smaller circulation. Edited by
Mary Ann Shadd (later Carey), the Freeman was known, like The Liberator, for
its uncompromising editorial tone.85 As a result, it struggled to find a wide read­
ership.86 It was also published out of western Canada, which further limited its
reach. And yet here we find its influence reaching quite far indeed, through the
pages of the widely­circulated National Anti­Slavery Standard, which adopted
aspects of its discourse. Notably, the Freeman also holds sway over the newspa­
pers edited by Frederick Douglass, which have dominated accounts of the Black
30

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

(a) Newspapers with Black editors as leaders

(b) Newspapers with women editors as leaders

(c) Newspapers with Black editors as followers

(d) Newspapers with women editors as followers

Figure 5: Focused lead­lag relationships We highlight the dyads in which the newspapers that had Black ed­
itors (left) and women editors (right). The top row shows the dyads in which these newspapers lead, while the
bottom row shows the dyads in which they trail. For more details on the editorial coding of newspapers, see
Contents and Metadata .

31

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

press. Taken together, these aggregated leader­follower pairs point to how a
quantitative analysis conducted at the level of changes in individual words, and
subsequently subjected to an analysis in terms of leadership, can help shift the
narrative about the abolition and those responsible for shaping its discourse.

Semantic Leadership Network
It is also possible to aggregate the leader­follower pairs and their changes all
together in order to form a directed, weighted network. In Figure 4, we display
leader­follower the relationships among all of the newspapers considered in our
study. In this diagram, all of the newspapers in our corpus are listed in order on
both sides. A chord that emerges from a newspaper’s name on the left indicates
that it leads on a single word, while one that connects on the right indicates that
the newspaper follows on that term. Thus, the vertical length next to any partic­
ular title indicates the number of words that the newspaper leads on or follows,
respectively. Examining the titles associated with the highest number of lead­
ing and following words, we find confirmation of two known findings: first,
that The Liberator holds broad influence over many of the other newspapers,
as intimated above; and second, that the National Anti­Slavery Standard tends
to follow much more than it leads. This reflects the rationale for launching the
paper, which was to provide a more moderate publication than The Liberator
so as to appeal to a broader coalition of potential supporters. (Recall that both
newspapers were published by the American Anti­Slavery Society.)
Just below those top­level leaders and followers, the most prominent leaders are
The Lily and Godey’s Lady’s Book. Both newspapers (mostly) edited by and
written for white women; neither is an abolitionist newspaper, so it is surprising
that they are found to lead in a corpus are centered on abolition. While more
research is required in order to understand the source of this influence, we can
learn a bit more by examining the relationships among them, as pictured in
Figure 5. Here we see two things: first, that the influence of these publications
can be detected in every single newspaper in our corpus; and second, that The
National Anti­Slavery Standard and Frederick Douglass’s various papers claim
32

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

the majority of their influences from these women’s publications.
When considering the sub­network of newspapers associated with the Black
press (Figure 5), we again observe that the influence of these papers is dis­
tributed across the corpus. Two newspapers dominate this sub­network: Freder­
ick Douglass’s newspapers and The Provincial Freeman. But it is worth noting
the titles that are far less embedded in the network: The Colored American and
The Christian Recorder, which rarely lead or follow. This does not imply that
they were not influential in their own right, but it does imply that their discourse
was not connected to the discourse of this larger, white­dominated print network.
It is quite possible — as has been suggested in the qualitative scholarship on the
subject — that the conversations documented in these papers stood apart from
the dominant, white­led abolitionist discourse. Future research might examine
these newspapers for additional evidence of what the conversation about aboli­
tion looked like in a predominately Black print sphere.

Network centrality
Finally, to better understand the holistic roles of each newspaper in the network,
we now move to the more sophisticated network analytic methods of pagerank
and HITS, described above. We first consider pagerank, which is based on the
number of terms on which each newspaper leads, but which especially rewards
newspaper who lead other leaders. High pagerank newspapers can therefore
be viewed as centralized consolidators of influence. Many of the titles previ­
ously discussed exhibit high pagerank scores (shown by node size in Figure 6),
including The National Anti­Slavery Standard and The Liberator. Again we
see Godey’s Lady’s Book and The Lily, as well as The National Era, suggest­
ing that these papers each played a central role in consolidating the abolitionist
discourse.
The HITS metrics (Hub and Authority scores, shown by position in Figure 6)
help to clarify this relationship by differentiate several distinct groups, as well
as some outliers. Once again, National Anti­Slavery Standard stands out with
33

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

Figure 6: Aggregate network statistics. For each newspaper, the Hub Score roughly corresponds to how often
it followed ongoing semantic changes, and the Authority Score to how often it led; node size corresponds to
pagerank. Node abbreviations are given in Figure 1. As in Figure 1, newspapers with Black editors are shown in
dark gray, and newspapers that were predominantly edited by and/or aimed at women have darker outlines.

the largest Hub score by far, indicating its position as a fast follower (but not
originator) of semantic change. We also find, conversely, that The Liberator
stands out with the largest Authority score, indicating its position as a leader. A
cluster of newspapers — Godey’s Lady’s Book, the Douglass Papers, as well as
the The Liberator — scored high on both metrics, indicating their active partic­
ipation as both leaders and followers of semantic change.
Returning to our initial focus on leadership, there are two titles with high Author­
ity scores but low Hub scores, indicating that they lead but rarely follow. These
are the two titles indicated at the outset of the essay: The Lily and The Provin­
cial Freeman, both of which were edited by women. That The Lily, women’s
suffrage paper, is so influential as a leader in this network of abolitionist news­
papers is a finding that points to the need for additional research, as it might sug­
gest a potentially revisionist narrative to the story that has the white women’s
suffrage movement departing from — and, at times, explicitly opposing — the
abolitionist cause.
That the Provincial Freeman is the second title on this list is more intriguing
still. Upon announcing her departure from the paper, Mary Ann Shadd, the
newspaper’s founder and editor, lamented that “Few, if any females had had to
34

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

contend against the same business” that she had faced, referring to the criticism
she had received as a result of her hard­hitting editorial style.87 She despairs
at the lack of recognition that her paper had commanded, in spite of her having
“broken the Editorial ice” for “colored women everywhere” by serving as the
first Black woman to edit a newspaper in all of North America. And yet here in
this chart is evidence of the influence that Shadd indeed commanded through
her editorial work. Long after The Provincial Freeman ceased publication, we
can return to its contents with fresh eyes, employing quantitative methods to
surface the semantic leadership that characterized the paper all along.

Conclusion
The archive of abolition will always be bound by the historical forces that con­
tributed to its creation — what Michel­Rolph Trouillot88 has described as the
“silences” of the past. But these silences have not stopped scholars from at­
tempting to derive meaning from the documents the archive does contain. On
the contrary, the constraints of the archive have prompted a range of scholars to
develop powerful new methods for the writing of history, methods which can
expand our knowledge of the past.
With this paper, we aim to contribute to these efforts. We argue that the con­
ceptual undercurrents of the abolitionist movement of the nineteenth­century
United States can be characterized in part by a consideration of neighbors: as
the meanings of words shift over time, these shifts are reflected in statistical
changes in the distributions over neighboring terms; similarly, the role of indi­
vidual newspapers with respect to these changes is characterized by the extent
to which they led or followed other newspapers in the adoption of these changes.
In some cases, these semantic changes are clearly at the core of the concerns of
the abolitionist movement, as in the case of terms like justice and rights. In­
deed, such examples are so central to the narrative of abolition that they merit
close individual analysis through non­computational techniques. Yet the bulk of
the semantic changes uncovered by our method are not of this type — they are
35

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

“everyday” words like busy and bold, ears and arms. To understand the story
told by these changes, we turn to aggregation, identifying newspapers that con­
sistently led their neighbors in the adoption (and in some cases, instigation) of
these shifts. This aggregate view confirms some existing intuitions: for exam­
ple, The Liberator, known for its role on the movement’s vanguard, is found
at the center (Figure 1), while Frank Leslie’s Weekly, which was intentionally
less political, is placed at the periphery. Aggregation also enables the use of net­
work statistics to distinguish classes of participants: leaders, like The Lily; fast
followers, like National Anti­Slavery Standard; and outsiders, like The Chris­
tian Recorder. The aggregate view also proposes some more unexpected results,
such as the prominence of the Godey’s Lady’s Book, a magazine that sought to
position itself apart from the political fray.
From a methodological perspective, a key intervention in this work is the use of
randomization to ensure that are findings are robust. This was necessary for two
reasons. First, although our dataset is large, we are interested in relatively rare
phenomena — the appearances of individual words in specific linguistic con­
texts by each newspaper at several different points in time. In any finite dataset,
rare phenomena may give rise to spurious correlations which are not represent
of meaningful underlying trends. Second, our dataset is heterogeneous: because
some newspapers publish earlier and more often than others, temporal methods
for detecting influence will inherently favor these newspapers. Randomization
addresses both of these issues by comparing our quantitative results against the
distribution of results obtained from a large set of alternative datasets in which
no semantic leadership is possible by construction. This methodology of control
by randomization is broadly applicable, and is especially applicable to analysis
of temporal phenomena, which is difficult to validate using traditional hypoth­
esis testing.89
Our hope is that the results presented here — the specific semantic changes, the
newspapers that exhibit semantic leadership (or that follow those leaders), and
the overall picture of the network of semantic influence among these various
papers — will become additional evidence that scholars working on the archive
36

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

of abolition can incorporate into their future work. Our findings about the lexi­
cal semantic leadership of two newspapers edited by women, one white and one
Black, certainly seem to prompt further investigation. The network of lexical
semantic leadership among the members of the Black press also seems worthy
of additional inquiry. And while any model developed with a particular archive
in mind must be translated to other contexts with intention and care, we believe
that our model, as documented in this essay, can be applied to other archives
in which questions of influence run up against the constraints of the historical
record, potentially enabling new narratives about the actors and agents involved
in advancing a shared social, cultural, or political goal.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback. The ini­
tial corpus creation effort was performed as part of the Interactive Topic Model
and Metadata Visualization (TOME) project, supported by NEH Office of Dig­
ital Humanities Grant HD­51705­13. This research was additionally supported
by NSF IIS­1452443.

Notes
1

E.g., Michel­Rolph Trouillot, Silencing the past: power and the production of history (Beacon Press, 1995);
Ann Laura Stoler, Along the archival grain: epistemic anxieties and colonial common sense (Princeton University
Press, 2009); Marisa J. Fuentes, Dispossessed lives: enslaved women, violence, and the archive, 1st edition, Early
American studies (PENN University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016).
2

John Ernest, Liberation historiography: African American writers and the challenge of history, 1794­1861
(University of North Carolina Press, 2004).
3

F. S. Foster, “A Narrative of the Interesting Origins and (Somewhat) Surprising Developments of African­
American Print Culture,” American Literary History 17, no. 4 (2005): 714–40, https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / alh /
aji042; Eric Gardner, Unexpected places: relocating nineteenth­century african american literature. (Univ. Press
of Mississippi, 2011); Benjamin Fagan, The black newspaper and the chosen nation (The University of Georgia
Press, 2016); Derrick R Spires, The Practice of Citizenship: Black Politics and Print Culture in the Early United
States. (2019).

37

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

4

Thomas MJ Fruchterman and Edward M Reingold, “Graph drawing by force­directed placement,” Software:
Practice and experience 21, no. 11 (1991): 1129–64.
5

M. Sinha, The Slave’s Cause: A History of Abolition (Yale University Press, 2016), pg. 2.

6

Martha S Jones, All Bound up Together: The Woman Question in African American Public Culture, 1830­1900.
(University of North Carolina Press, 2009), pg. 2.
7

E.g., Carla L. Peterson, Doers of the word: African­American women speakers and writers in the North (1830­
1880), Race and American culture (Oxford University Press, 1995); P. Gabrielle Foreman, Activist sentiments:
reading Black women in the nineteenth century, The new Black studies series (University of Illinois Press, 2009);
Jones, All Bound up Together: The Woman Question in African American Public Culture, 1830­1900.
8

Colored Conventions Project, 2020.

9

Spires, The Practice of Citizenship: Black Politics and Print Culture in the Early United States., pg. 108.

10

John R Firth, “A synopsis of linguistic theory, 1930­1955,” Studies in linguistic analysis, 1957,

11

Derry Tanti Wijaya and Reyyan Yeniterzi, “Understanding semantic change of words over centuries,” in Pro­
ceedings of the 2011 international workshop on DETecting and Exploiting Cultural diversiTy on the social web
(ACM, 2011), 35–40; Andrey Kutuzov et al., “Diachronic word embeddings and semantic shifts: a survey,” in
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (2018), 1384–97.
12

Nikhil Garg et al., “Word embeddings quantify 100 years of gender and ethnic stereotypes,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 115, no. 16 (2018): E3635–E3644; Austin C Kozlowski, Matt Taddy, and James
A Evans, “The Geometry of Culture: Analyzing the Meanings of Class through Word Embeddings,” American
Sociological Review 84, no. 5 (2019): 905–49.
13

Michael Gavin et al., “Spaces of Meaning: Conceptual History, Vector Semantics, and Close Reading,” in
Debates in the Digital Humanities 2019 (University of Minnesota Press, 2019), 243–67.
14

Anna Shechtman, “Command of Media’s Metaphors,” Critical Inquiry 47, no. 2 (2020).

15

The code can be found at https://github.com/sandeepsoni/semantic­leadership­network

16

E.g., Martha S. Jones, Vanguard: how black women broke barriers, won the vote, and insisted on equality for
all, First edition (Basic Books, 2020); Elizabeth Gillespie McRae, Mothers of massive resistance: white women
and the politics of white supremacy (Oxford University Press, 2018).
17

Guy Bailey, “Real and Apparent Time,” in The Handbook of Language Variation and Change (2002), 312–33.

18

Janet B Pierrehumbert, “The dynamic lexicon,” Handbook of laboratory phonology, 2012, 173–83.

19

Firth, “A synopsis of linguistic theory, 1930­1955.”

20

Tomas Mikolov et al., “Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality,” in Ad­

38

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

vances in neural information processing systems (2013), 3111–19.
21

E.g. Benjamin Schmidt, “Vector space models for the digital humanities,” Ben’s Bookworm Blog. Accessed
October 25 (2015): 2015; Ryan James Heuser, “Word Vectors in the Eighteenth Century.,” in Digital Humanities
(2017); Michael Gavin, “Vector Semantics, William Empson, and the Study of Ambiguity,” Critical Inquiry 44,
no. 4 (2018): 641–73, https://doi.org/10.1086/698174; Gavin et al., “Spaces of Meaning: Conceptual History,
Vector Semantics, and Close Reading.”
22

E.g., Wijaya and Yeniterzi, “Understanding semantic change of words over centuries”; Yoon Kim et al., “Tem­
poral Analysis of Language through Neural Language Models,” in Proceedings of the ACL 2014 Workshop on
Language Technologies and Computational Social Science (2014), 61–65; Vivek Kulkarni et al., “Statistically
significant detection of linguistic change,” in Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on World Wide
Web (International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2015), 625–35; William L Hamilton, Jure
Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky, “Diachronic Word Embeddings Reveal Statistical Laws of Semantic Change,” in Pro­
ceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
vol. 1 (2016), 1489–501; Maja Rudolph and David Blei, “Dynamic embeddings for language evolution,” in Pro­
ceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference (2018), 1003–11; Zijun Yao et al., “Dynamic word embeddings
for evolving semantic discovery,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search
and Data Mining (ACM, 2018), 673–81.
23

For an overview, see Kutuzov et al., “Diachronic word embeddings and semantic shifts: a survey”; Nina Tah­
masebi, Lars Borin, and Adam Jatowt, “Survey of Computational Approaches to Diachronic Conceptual Change,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.06278, 2018, Xuri Tang, “A state­of­the­art of semantic change computation,” Natural
Language Engineering 24, no. 5 (2018): 649–76.
24

William L Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky, “Diachronic Word Embeddings Reveal Statistical Laws
of Semantic Change,” in Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), vol. 1 (2016), 1489–501
25

Nikhil Garg et al., “Word embeddings quantify 100 years of gender and ethnic stereotypes,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 115, no. 16 (2018): E3635–E3644
26

Anna Shechtman, “Command of Media’s Metaphors,” Critical Inquiry 47, no. 2 (2020)

27

Sandeep Soni, Kristina Lerman, and Jacob Eisenstein, “Follow the Leader: Documents on the Leading Edge of
Semantic Change Get More Citations,” Journal for the Association of Information Science and Technology, 2020,
28

William Labov, “Principles of linguistic change Volume 2: Social factors,” Language in society 29 (2001).

29

See William Labov, “The intersection of sex and social class in the course of linguistic change,” Language
variation and change 2, no. 2 (1990): 205–54; Penelope Eckert and Sally McConnell­Ginet, Language and gen­
der (Cambridge University Press, 2013); Sali A Tagliamonte and Alexandra D’Arcy, “Peaks beyond phonology:
Adolescence, incrementation, and language change,” Language, 2009, 58–108. This finding is generally reported
without consideration of non­binary genders; for research on the sociolinguistics of non­binary genders, see Lal
Zimman and Kira Hall, “Language, embodiment, and the ‘third sex’,” Language and identities 166 (2009): 178
and Chantal Gratton, “Resisting the gender binary: The use of (ING) in the construction of non­binary transgender

39

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

identities,” University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics 22, no. 2 (2016): 7.
30

Bailey, “Real and Apparent Time.”

31

Gillian Sankoff and Hélène Blondeau, “Language change across the lifespan:/r/in Montreal French,” Lan­
guage, 2007, 560–88.
32

Cristian Danescu­Niculescu­Mizil et al., “No country for old members: User lifecycle and linguistic change
in online communities,” in Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on World Wide Web (2013), 307–18
find evidence of stability in which words are used, but provide no evidence about word meaning.
33

Labov, “Principles of linguistic change Volume 2: Social factors”

34

Lesley Milroy, Language and social networks (Wiley­Blackwell, 1987)

35

Jacob Eisenstein et al., “Diffusion of lexical change in social media,” PloS one 9, no. 11 (2014): e113114

36

Rahul Goel et al., “The social dynamics of language change in online networks,” in International Conference
on Social Informatics (Springer, 2016), 41–57
37

Fangjian Guo et al., “The bayesian echo chamber: Modeling social influence via linguistic accommodation,”
in Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (2015), 315–23.
38

Bryan Kelly et al., Measuring technological innovation over the long run, technical report (National Bureau
of Economic Research, 2018).
39

David M Blei, “Probabilistic topic models,” Communications of the ACM 55, no. 4 (2012): 77–84.

40

Jie Tang et al., “Social influence analysis in large­scale networks,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM SIGKDD in­
ternational conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining (2009), 807–16; Lu Liu et al., “Mining topic­level
influence in heterogeneous networks,” in Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference on Information
and knowledge management (2010), 199–208.
41

Kelly et al., Measuring technological innovation over the long run.

42

Howard Giles, Nikolas Coupland, and Justine Coupland, “Accommodation theory: Communication, context,
and consequence,” in Contexts of accommodation: Developments in applied sociolinguistics, ed. Howard Giles,
Justine Coupland, and Nikolas Coupland (Cambridge University Press, 1991), 1–68.
43

E.g. Robin D. G Kelley, Freedom dreams: the Black radical imagination (Beacon Press, 2002); Salamishah
Tillet, Sites of slavery: citizenship and racial democracy in the post­civil rights imagination (Duke University
Press, 2012).
44

Susan Maret, “Accessible archives,” The Charleston Advisor 18, no. 2 (2016): 17–20.

45

Lawrence Page et al., The PageRank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web., technical report (Stanford
InfoLab, 1999).

40

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

46

Jon M Kleinberg, “Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment,” Journal of the ACM (JACM) 46, no.
5 (1999): 604–32.
47

Scott Deerwester et al., “Indexing by latent semantic analysis,” Journal of the American society for information
science 41, no. 6 (1990): 391–407; Peter D Turney and Patrick Pantel, “From frequency to meaning: Vector space
models of semantics,” Journal of artificial intelligence research 37 (2010): 141–88.
48

Mikolov et al., “Distributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality.”

49

Zellig S Harris, “Distributional structure,” Word 10, nos. 2­3 (1954): 146–62; Firth, “A synopsis of linguistic
theory, 1930­1955”; Alessandro Lenci, “Distributional semantics in linguistic and cognitive research,” Italian
journal of linguistics 20, no. 1 (2008): 1–31.
50

E.g., Heuser, “Word Vectors in the Eighteenth Century.”; Gavin, “Vector Semantics, William Empson, and the
Study of Ambiguity.”
51

David Bamman, Chris Dyer, and Noah A Smith, “Distributed representations of geographically situated lan­
guage,” in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers) (2014), 828–34.
52

See also recent work by Nabeel Gillani and Roger Levy, “Simple dynamic word embeddings for mapping
perceptions in the public sphere,” in Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Natural Language Processing and
Computational Social Science (2019), 94–99.
53

E.g. William L Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Jurafsky, “Cultural Shift or Linguistic Drift? Comparing
Two Computational Measures of Semantic Change.,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, vol. 2016 (2016), 2116; Ehsaneddin Asgari, Christoph Ringlstetter, and Hinrich
Schütze, “Unsupervised Embedding­based Detection of Lexical Semantic Changes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.07979,
2020, Hila Gonen et al., “Simple, Interpretable and Stable Method for Detecting Words with Usage Change across
Corpora,” in Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Online:
Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020), 538–55.
54

Hamilton, Leskovec, and Jurafsky, “Cultural Shift or Linguistic Drift? Comparing Two Computational Mea­
sures of Semantic Change.”
55

E.g. Kulkarni et al., “Statistically significant detection of linguistic change”; Hamilton, Leskovec, and Juraf­
sky, “Diachronic Word Embeddings Reveal Statistical Laws of Semantic Change.”
56

Helena Raumolin­Brunberg, “Leaders of linguistic change in Early Modern England,” Corpus­based studies
of diachronic English, 2006, 115–34.
57

E.g. Thomas C. Leonard, News for all: America’s coming­of­age with the press (Oxford University Press,
1995); Robert A Gross and Mary Kelley, eds., An extensive republic: print, culture, and society in the new nation,
1790­1840, A history of the book in America (Published in Association with the American Antiquarian Society by
The University of North Carolina Press, 2010).
58

Morris H. DeGroot and Mark J. Schervish, Probability and statistics, 4th (Pearson Education, 2011).

41

A B O L I T I O N I S T N E T W O R K S : M O D E L I N G L A N G U A G E C H A N G E I N N I N E T E E N T H ­ C E N T U RY
A C T I V I S T N E W S PA P E R S

59

Similar procedures which involve permutation have been used in network regression. For example, see
William Simpson, “QAP: The quadratic assignment procedure,” in North American STATA users’ group meeting
(2001), 12–13
60

Page et al., The PageRank citation ranking: Bringing order to the web.

61

Kleinberg, “Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment.”

62

E.g., Mark Newman, Networks (Oxford university press, 2018).

63

We set α = 0.85 and β = 0.15/|S|, as is typical of many applications of pagerank see Pavel Berkhin, “A
Survey on PageRank Computing,” Internet Mathematics 2, no. 1 (2005): for a discussion.
64

Matthew L. Jockers, “Computing and Visualizing the 19th­Century Literary Genome,” in DH (2012).

65

Matthew O Jackson, Social and economic networks (Princeton university press, 2010).

66

Unlike pagerank, α and β are not needed to be preset and are related to the leading eigen value of AT A and
AA Newman, Networks.
T

67

E.g. Xiaorui Jiang, Xiaoping Sun, and Hai Zhuge, “Towards an effective and unbiased ranking of scientific
literature through mutual reinforcement,” in Proceedings of the 21st ACM international conference on Information
and knowledge management (2012), 714–23.
68

E.g. Saatviga Sudhahar et al., “Network analysis of narrative content in large corpora,” Natural Language
Engineering 21, no. 1 (2015): 81.
69

https://www.accessible­archives.com/

70

Lauren F. Klein, Jacob Eisenstein, and Iris Sun, “Exploratory Thematic Analysis for Digitized Archival Collec­
tions,” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 30, no. suppl 1 (2015): i130–i141, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqv052.
71

Leonard, News for all: America’s coming­of­age with the press.

72

Fagan, The black newspaper and the chosen nation.

73

Jim Casey, Editing Forms: The Emergence of Editorship in Nineteenth­Century U.S. Periodicals, PhD Dis­
sertation (University of Delaware, 2017).
74

Katherine Bode, A world of fiction: digital collections and the future of literary history (University of Michigan
Press, 2018).
75

Gross and Kelley, An extensive republic: print, culture, and society in the new nation, 1790­1840.

76

Ray Smith, “An overview of the Tesseract OCR engine,” in Document Analysis and Recognition, 2007. ICDAR
2007. Ninth International Conference on, vol. 2 (IEEE, 2007), 629–33.

42

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

77

Other digital errors (e.g. first or last letter of a word getting stripped) also occur in the corpus but are not
systematic.
78

Ido Kissos and Nachum Dershowitz, “OCR error correction using character correction and feature­based word
classification,” in 2016 12th IAPR Workshop on Document Analysis Systems (DAS) (IEEE, 2016), 198–203.
79

Sandeep Soni, Lauren Klein, and Jacob Eisenstein, “Correcting Whitespace Errors in Digitized Historical
Texts,” in Proceedings of the 3rd Joint SIGHUM Workshop on Computational Linguistics for Cultural Heritage,
Social Sciences, Humanities and Literature (2019), 98–103.
80

See Ryan Cordell et al., Going the Rounds Virality in Nineteenth­Century American Newspapers (University
of Minnesota Press, Forthcoming).
81

With 5 and 20 time intervals, the discovered semantic changes were very similar, with approximately 90% of
all changes preserved across all three settings. However, increasing the number of intervals made the residuals
more difficult to compute, while decreasing the number of intervals made it difficult to isolate the precise time of
changes. Consequently, we set the number of intervals to ten as a tradeoff.
82

Foster, “A Narrative of the Interesting Origins and (Somewhat) Surprising Developments of African­American
Print Culture”; Fagan, The black newspaper and the chosen nation.
83

Lauren F. Klein, “Dimensions of Scale: Invisible Labor, Editorial Work, and the Future of Quantitative Literary
Studies,” PMLA 135, no. 1 (2020): 23–39, https://doi.org/10.1632/pmla.2020.135.1.23.
84

Klein.

85

Jane Rhodes, Mary Ann Shadd Cary: the Black press and protest in the nineteenth century (Indiana University
Press, 1998); Jim Casey, “Parsing Special Characters: Mary Ann Shadd and the Limits of Search Algorithms,” in
Infrastructures of African American Print (University of Wisconsin Press, 2019).
86

Rhodes, Mary Ann Shadd Cary: the Black press and protest in the nineteenth century.

87

Mary Ann Shadd, “Adieu,” Provincial Freeman, June 1855,

88

Trouillot, Silencing the past: power and the production of history.

89

E.g., Haim Dubossarsky, Daphna Weinshall, and Eitan Grossman, “Outta control: Laws of semantic change
and inherent biases in word representation models,” in Proceedings of the 2017 conference on empirical methods
in natural language processing (2017), 1136–45; Haim Dubossarsky et al., “Time­Out: Temporal Referencing for
Robust Modeling of Lexical Semantic Change,” in The 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL 2019) Proceedings of the Conference (ACL, 2019).

43

