Journal of
Cultural Analytics

April 20, 2021

Content-Era Ethics
Tess McNulty
Tess McNulty, Harvard University
Peer-Reviewer: Scott Selisker
Data Repository: 10.7910/DVN/S3DFCU

ABSTRACT
New media forms affect a culture, in part, by reshaping what is seeable and sayable: what “ideas,” as Neil
Postman once put it, “we can conveniently express.” In this essay, I ask what one of today’s major new
media forms—viral, digital “content”—compels us to see and say. To address that question, I embrace a
makeshift, hybrid methodology, informed by theory, sociology, arts criticism, and the digital humanities,
and eschewing media theoretical orthodoxies that have been dominant across the humanities (namely: an
exaggerated emphasis on the “medium” at the expense of the “message”). From this polyglot perspective, I
analyze content contained in a database that I have compiled, indexing 205,147 of the most-shared pieces
of viral media on sites like Facebook and Twitter, from 2014 to 2019. After surveying this content’s basic
features, I focus on one, particularly popular and quintessential content genre, which I call the “uplifting
anecdote”: a short, sentimental account of a heroic act. The uplifting anecdote, I argue, promotes a novel
type of ethics, ideally suited to the content economy. I then track this ethics’ dissemination into the broader
culture, through a discussion of two prominent, aesthetic artifacts: George Saunders’ prize-winning, bestselling novel, Lincoln in the Bardo (2017), and NBC’s popular sitcom, The Good Place (2016-2020).

Between 2008 and 2012, social media changed. Previously, companies like
Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and Flickr had been small, independent startups.
Their sites were walled gardens where users could create and consume distinct
varieties of amateur entertainment — tweets, YouTube videos, etc. By 2012, these
companies were corporatizing and cooperating, not only with one another but also
with other major media distributors. Their sites became connected contributors to
the smooth circulation of professional media.1 Consider, for example, Facebook,
then as now the most popular platform. For the first few years after its founding in
2004, the site was a forum for social voyeurism. Users — mostly students —
logged on to view friends’ relationship statuses or profile pictures. Soon, however,
the site became a commons for more generic media engagement. Users’ newsfeeds
were now inundated with popular ephemera, pouring in from external sources: opeds, quizzes, listicles, how-to videos.
At the same time, the only collective label for such ephemera — “content” — burst
into popular American parlance. As one 2009 blogger noted:

Journal of Cultural Analytics 4 (2021): 290-325. doi: 10.22148/001c.22220

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

At first it was just the by now omnipresent “User
Generated Content”. But now websites are filled with
‘content’. TV schedules are now packed with “content”.
Radio stations use “content” to fill the airtime. . . . It’s
everywhere.2
Previously, the word “content” had been used, often by academics and media
industry insiders, to refer to anything conveyed by a medium or form (TV
“content,” the “content” of a poem). But beginning around 2009, it also took on a
narrower, more pejorative connotation. “Content,” today, suggests entertainment
— typically digital — that is a mere byproduct or afterthought, designed to do little
more than facilitate some profit-driven process, like advertising or data collection.
“Content” is not exactly a medium, like television (at least not in the same way).
Nor is it a genre, like the sitcom. Rather, it connotes something more like a class: a
particular stratum — in this case, lower — of some broader category (like “craft,”
as opposed to “art”). We easily call a Buzzfeed listicle “content,” but less quickly
apply the term to a New Yorker poem.
Mere filler entertainment, of course, predates Web 2.0. Think, for example, of
journalistic fluff-pieces or infomercials. Today, however, content emerges in new
and newly ubiquitous digital forms: articles about radical self-experiments (“I only
drank Soylent for a week!”), reports of unlikely animal friendships (“This puppy
and this iguana . . . ”), or hot-takes on celebrity faux-pas (“Chrissy Teigan said
what about Parasite?) infiltrate every free minute of the day. A few features set
today’s content apart from its pre-digital precursors. Most importantly, it pursues
distinct aims. Pre-internet filler — in the form, say, of the tabloid story — was
mainly designed to compel “consumption”: reading or viewing. It profited most
directly by inspiring subscriptions, pushing products, or attracting attention to
advertisements. Web 2.0-era content does the same, of course. But it also profits
more directly by promoting “prosumption”: “consumption” as expressive
“production.”3 Post-circa 2008, that mostly means “shares,” “comments,” and
“likes” on platforms like Facebook and Twitter.
Put another way, today’s content is what Henry Jenkins, Sam Ford, and Joshua
Green call “spreadable media”: media created not simply for top-down
“distribution,” but also for grassroots “circulation.” It must “attract eyeballs” — or
earn “impressions” — to be sure. But its more insistent purpose is to be shared,
remixed, or re-appropriated by people “who want to communicate something about
291

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

themselves.”4 For Jia Tolentino, such media “brings the ‘I’ into everything”: “it’s
as if we’ve been placed on a lookout that oversees the entire world and given a pair
of binoculars that makes everything look like our own reflection.”5 For Wendy
Chun, it renders YouTube’s “You” digital life’s definitive pronoun.6 In either case,
the implication is the same. Each piece of content approaches the user, not merely
as a source of entertainment, but also as a fashion statement: “What would this
look like on me?”
New media forms, Neil Postman once argued, affect a culture by reshaping what is
seeable and sayable, or “what ideas we can conveniently express.”7 What does
content compel us to see and say? In this article, I approach that question from a
perspective somewhere between the disciplinary coordinates of media theory,
sociological internet studies, literary criticism and the digital humanities. Like a
theorist, I approach a broad, cultural question by means of abstract thought and arts
analysis. Unlike a (typical) media theorist, however, I focus on the object against
which media theory is defined: content itself. Rather than simply examine the
institutional, legal, or technological structures that shape social media
entertainment, I also analyze that entertainment’s look and feel. I do not, however,
do so in precisely the manner that a more sociological practitioner of media studies
might: by means of a largely thematic “content analysis.” Rather, I do so more in
the mode of a literary critic, or digital humanist working within an arts discipline. I
attend not only to the content’s thematics, but also to its aesthetic, narrative, and
generic elements, as revealed by “close” and “distant” reading. The convictions
behind this approach are simple: that the meanings encoded in a medium are very
real contributors to its cultural effect; and that the aesthetic forms through which
those meanings are conveyed make a difference, too. In sum, my approach is
pluralist. For that very reason, I will not dwell much longer on questions of
method. A lengthy discussion of the pros and cons of McLuhanism or “distant
reading” would leave little room to address the question at hand.8
To address that question, I will examine content indexed in a database that I have
compiled using public and proprietary sources and tools (Newswhip and
Buzzsumo).9 The database contains a list of 205,147 pieces of content that have,
throughout the past five years (2014-2019) gone “viral.” By that, I mean that they
have earned 500,000 or more shares on popular social networking sites,
particularly Facebook and Twitter. This viral content includes much of the most
popular content produced by top producers, like NYTimes.com and Buzzfeed.com;
292

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

it also includes a critical mass of mega-viral content produced by more obscure
outlets. Here, I will focus, primarily, on one segment of the data in the database:
the headline text.10 To analyze that text, I will use close and distant methods (Topic
Modeling, Sentiment Analysis, Naïve Bayes Classification). To minimize metadiscussion, however, I will move in-depth descriptions of procedure to endnotes.
In addition to analyzing content en masse, I will focus more narrowly on one
particularly popular and quintessential content genre, which I call the “uplifting
anecdote.” Uplifting anecdotes are short, heartwarming stories (or groups of
stories), presented as true, like Reshareworthy’s “Incredible Dog Who Saved the
Life of Newborn Baby Has Lasting Legacy” or Bored Panda's “30 Suicide
Survivors Share How Happy They Finally Are.”11 Generally, they are sentimental,
in the pejorative, post-1900 sense of the word. More particularly, they evoke an
emotion that — as Jill Abramson has quipped — has no name: “the feeling of
having one’s faith in humanity restored” (In this respect, they fall into the broader
category of what sociologists call “eudaimonic media”).12 Uplifting anecdotes are
pervasive, comprising an estimated one-ninth, or 11.4 percent, of the content listed
in my archive.13 They are also representative. As I will show, they embody many
of content’s more common features. One of those features is an overwhelming
concern with the ethical or moral. By focusing on the uplifting anecdote, I examine
how social media content’s rise to prominence is reshaping popular ethics.
Mainly, I argue that social media content, thanks to its particular pursuit of
“prosumption,” abets a simultaneous expansion and thinning of ethics. It promotes
heightened moral concern, but simultaneously reduces moral action to aesthetic
self-expression — namely, the self-curation involved in acts like “sharing,”
“commenting,” and “liking.” Whereas mass media may have, as Benjamin argued,
enabled an “aestheticization of politics,” content contributes to a parallel and
particular aestheticization of ethics.14 My analysis will proceed in three parts. First,
I will look broadly at content — its key features, and their ties to prosumption.
Next, I will look more closely at the uplifting anecdote, conceived of as an
embodiment of those features, and analyze the ethics that it promotes. Finally, to
unpack the implications of that ethics, I will trace some of its dissemination into
the broader culture.
In particular, I will reflect upon the uplifting anecdote and its ethics’
influence in relation to two cultural artifacts: NBC’s sitcom The Good Place and
George Saunders’s novel Lincoln in the Bardo. Emerging at around the same time
293

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

(2016-17), the TV show and novel both take place in afterlife spaces — the “Good
Place” and “Bardo” — that, as I will argue, operate as all-too-apt allegories for
social media, conveying its pervasive atmosphere of moral and ethical scrutiny.
The show and novel also reflect, more specifically, on social media content’s
aestheticized ethics. Both, as I will demonstrate, were not only loosely inspired by
uplifting anecdotes, but also channel the genre in their content and form. In the
process, they embrace divergent responses to a world of ever-present and yet
etiolated ethics.

Content, Two Ways
Two major schemata describe the content in my archive particularly well,
capturing its major thematic, generic, and aesthetic features. The first schema
orients the content between two poles: the domestic and heartwarming and the
political and corrosive. The second schema divides the content into three major
categories: content concerning (1) real, sensational events, (2) the self, or (3)
artifice or craft. Close and distant reading, taken together, suggest those schemata.
To begin with the first schema, a critical mass of content approaches (if without
always fully embodying) one of two opposing poles. The first pole represents
content that is sentimental, uplifting, or unifying. This content often focuses on
ethical, private, or domestic realms. Its topics are family life or other classic
objects of sentimental concern: the vulnerable among us (as Phil Fisher aptly
defines them), like animals, children, or the elderly.15 Examples include The
Dodo’s “Man Builds ‘Dog Train’ To Take Rescued Pups Out On Little
Adventures” or Bitecharge’s “I am a Faithful Wife. What Type of Wife Are
You?”16 The second pole represents content that is corrosive, upsetting, or divisive.
This content often focuses on political or public realms. In recent years, it has
mostly fixated on Donald Trump. Examples include Shoebat.com’s “Hillary
Clinton: Christians in America Must Deny Their Faith in Christianity” or The
Independent’s “Donald Trump May be the Dimmest President the U.S. has Ever
Had.”17
Multiple methods suggest those two tendencies’ ubiquity, as well as the slight
dominance of the first. A topic model, for example, divides the headline text of the
content into 150 (strikingly straightforward) topics. The model was run on 205,147
294

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

documents — the headlines — comprising 2,399,270 words.18 The top three topics,
ordered by relative weight, can be titled: “Family,” “Animal Rescue” (one
subgenre of the uplifting anecdote), and “Trump and the Economy” (Table 1). This
trio suggests the utility of the two-sided schema, with the first two most abundant
topics suggesting the sentimental or domestic and the third suggesting the political
or corrosive. A closer look at the topics confirms this schema’s utility. Of the 150
total topics, almost half (68) fall cleanly into one of the two major categories, with
sentimental or domestic topics (like “parenting,” “childbirth” or “DIY Home”)
possessing a cumulative weight of 0.311, and political or corrosive topics (like
“Russian Investigation,” “Trump vs. Clinton,” and “Police Brutality/BLM”)
possessing a cumulative weight of 0.301. Many of the rest of the topics have at
least some affinity with one category or another. Otherwise, they are diverse (they
include, for example, “science facts,” “restaurant deals,” and “amazing photos”).
Topic Title

Weight

Words

1

Family

0.03779

mom dad daughter year son man wife woman girl
boy viral mother husband day photo father video
baby teen back

2

Animal
Rescue

0.02517

dog cat man dogs shelter home woman family pit
bull owner life puppy years stray kitten
abandoned finds rescued found

3

Trump and 0.02465
the
Economy

trump million pay tax money billion workers cut
year government cuts jobs cost paid millions
report federal debt company budget

4

Parenting

0.02026

kids children parents people things don child time
stop reasons moms good mom raise home
mothers age school sleep give

5

Misc

0.02025

don people things didn doesn make stop wrong
good facts give feel won real opinion work time
reason made care

6

TV

0.0198

season trailer game movie netflix star thrones
back official series cast coming officially horror
295

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

film marvel show wars confirms avengers
7

Russia
0.0193
Investigatio
n

trump russia mueller russian report fbi campaign
donald putin investigation probe obama election
security evidence comey team officials
intelligence kushner

8

Childbirth

0.01882

baby mom mother year birth son born years
parents woman pregnant child life girl boy
hospital daughter twins father babies

9

Sexual
Crimes

0.01756

man year years prison sex death child woman girl
jail rape arrested raped charged sentenced
accused trafficking time police murder

10

DIY Home

0.0159

ideas diy make home easy design christmas ways
kitchen projects creative fun kids garden room
crafts decor wedding house cool

11

Music
Events

0.01413

song watch year sing dance sings singing music
video performance girl talent voice stage crowd
tears live cover dancing show

12

Trump
Legislation
/ Congress

0.01398

trump house bill gop senate democrats vote tax
republicans mcconnell paul congress republican
senator mitch returns government obamacare
calls senators

13

Presidential 0.01299
Families

obama trump michelle political president barack
insider watch video response speech donald
america melania made makes conway lady
breaking called

14

Trump
Inauguratio
n

trump donald president pence mike anti rally
supporters speech america opinion calls london
people protesters march protest crowd obama

0.01281

296

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

inauguration
15

Trump vs. 0.01269
Clinton

trump clinton hillary sanders donald bernie
president poll election vote presidential biden win
campaign run voters debate democrats won party

16

Traffic
Accidents

car driver man bus truck cars woman driving
crash road drivers police hit ford train drive
parking uber station back

17

Animal and 0.0126
Human
Rescues

fire man save dog year life california car dies
saved left rescue water lives girl hero boy
firefighters hot saves

18

Islam/Omar 0.01256

muslim muslims omar trump israel ilhan anti
islam jewish women ban america christians
refugees islamic american tlaib rep stand support

19

Identity/Rac 0.01251
ism/Sexism

black white people women men america don
racist americans racism stop history face lives
american woman matter african police blacks

20

Police
Brutality/B
LM

police shot man killed officer black cop shooting
gun officers woman video cops dead shoots year
home texas head kills

0.01263

0.01212

Table 1. The topic model's top twenty topics listed in descending order of relative weight — or presence — in the
205,147 content headlines.

More simple analyses, like word frequencies, reinforce this same schema. A
plurality of the fifteen most frequently appearing nouns in the headlines, for
example, conjure home and hearth (“house,” “home,” “family,” “dog,” “school,”
“baby”), while the single most frequent, “Trump,” invokes political controversy
(though its use does not outnumber that of the domestic/sentimental words). Other
analyses yield similar results. A sentiment analysis of the headlines, using Saif
Mohammad’s NRC Lexicon (which associates English words with eight different
feelings), is consistent with the slight dominance of the domestic and unifying over
the political and controversial.19 It shows that, relative to all of the words in the
lexicon, the words in the content headlines embody a higher ratio of positive and
297

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

prosocial feelings — like “joy” or “trust” — to negative or corrosive feelings —
like “anger,” “fear,” or “disgust” (Figure 1).

Figure 1: The percentage of words associated with eight key emotions in the entirety of Saif Mohammad's NRC
English-language Lexicon (blue) versus in the content headlines (green).

A second, useful schema is tripartite, dividing the content into three major
categories. First, there is content that describes real, sensational events. This
includes, for example, the genres of the uplifting anecdote and the upsetting
anecdote (its less abundant foil). Second, there is content that indulges its
audiences in navel gazing. This includes, for example, the genres of the quiz (selfdescription) or how-to guide (self-improvement). Third, there is content that is
aesthetic or fictitious in nature or concern, rather than (allegedly) informative. This
includes, for example, the genres of the music video or craft-related content (e.g.,
“Seven breathtaking sandcastles”). Most content appears to belong to at least one
of these three categories. Close inspection of multiple samples of the content
confirms that rough impression. Almost all of the first thirty consecutive pieces of
content listed in my archive (Table 2), for example — also the thirty most shared
— can be sorted into the three proposed categories. Category one claims the
political news, uplifting anecdotes, and celebrity deaths; category two claims the
quizzes and self-celebratory think-pieces; category three claims the music videos
and photography. Computation reinforces this schema’s comprehensiveness.
Consider again the results of the topic model, a list of 150 major topics ranked by
298

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

weight (Table 2). Category one claims two of the three most abundant topics,
“Animal Rescue” and “Trump and the Economy,” as well as fifty-nine other lower
ranking or redundant topics, like “Russia Investigation,” “Traffic Accidents,” and
“Animal and Human Rescues.” Category two then claims eighteen of the
remaining topics, including “Weight Loss,” “Hair and Makeup,” and “Personality
Type Quiz.” Category three encompasses another thirty-three topics, including
“Music Videos,” “Bollywood,” and “Tattoos and Arts and Crafts.” All in all, more
than 2/3 of the 150 topics fall into these three categories. This analysis suggests,
moreover, that the first category of content, about sensational events, dominates
the corpus: topic groupings associated with it contain the largest number of
individual topics (61 of 150)20 and have a dominant cumulative weight (0.52698).21
Such content is also, it is worth noting, largely divided in accordance with the first
schema: between the sentimental, uplifting, or domestic (e.g., uplifting anecdotes)
and the political, corrosive, or controversial (e.g., upsetting anecdotes).
Headline

URL

1

Which birth
common?

dates

2

Legacy of Discord

3

Disturbed - The Sound Of Silence https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u
[Official Music Video]
9Dg-g7t2l4

4

Ed Sheeran - Thinking Out Loud https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l
[Official Video]
p-EO5I60KA

5

Ed Sheeran - Shape of You https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J
[Official Video]
GwWNGJdvx8

6

Newcastle school boy aged 12 has https://policehour.co.uk/2017/04/take
been found safe and well
s-two-seconds-to-share-school-boyaged-12-missing-from-newcastle/

7

The Secret
Mystery

Society

are

most https://9gag.com/gag/aLQ6mGz/whic
h-birth-dates-are-most-common
https://fb.me/1275575875786486

-

Hidden http://www.g5e.com/games/the_secre
t_society_hidden_mystery_ios

299

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

8

Wiz Khalifa - See You Again ft. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R
Charlie Puth [Official Video] gKAFK5djSk
Furious 7 Soundtrack

9

Coldplay - Hymn For The Weekend https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y
(Official Video)
ykjpeuMNEk

10

No Ads

11

FOUND: 12 & 14 Year Olds found https://policehour.co.uk/2017/10/urge
safe and well after extensive police nt-takes-2-seconds-share-missingsearch
girls-aged-12-14/

12

Linkin Park Singer Chester https://www.tmz.com/2017/07/20/lin
Bennington Dead, Commits Suicide kin-park-singer-chester-benningtonby Hanging
dead-commits-suicide/

13

Loyal Employees are your Most https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/loyal
Valuable Asset!
-employees-your-most-valuableasset-brigette-hyacinth

14

Charlie Puth - We Don't Talk https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3
Anymore (feat. Selena Gomez) AtDnEC4zak
[Official Video]

15

Americans rank Barack Obama as https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/ameri
best president of their lifetimes: Poll cans-rank-barack-obama-bestpresident-lifetimespoll/story?id=56545031

16

Dresses For Women: Sexy & Cute https://www.twinkledeals.com/dresse
Dresses Fashion Sale Online Free s-cc39/
Shipping

17

Trump backs push for Bible classes https://www.cbsnews.com/news/trum
in schools
p-backs-controversial-push-for-bible-

http://appflood.com/images/xpromt/n
oad.html

300

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

classes-in-schools/
18

Pentatonix, Mary Did You Know

https://faithtap.com/2089/pentatonixmary-did-you-know/

19

Bring Back Home Economics Class https://www.trendings.net/a/bringBecause Our Kids Lack Basic Life back-home-economics-class-becauseSkills
our-kids-lack-basic-life-skills

20

Ford cancels Mexico plant, expands https://www.usatoday.com/story/mon
U.S. factory and adds 700 jobs
ey/cars/2017/01/03/ford-motor-codonald-trump-mexico-us/96106334/

21

Ellie Goulding - Love Me Like You https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A
Do (Official Video)
JtDXIazrMo

22

Greenwich school girl Kasey https://policehour.co.uk/2017/04/take
Hacking aged 12 has been found s-2-seconds-share-help-find-missingsafe and well
11-year-old/

23

Stunning images of snowy owl https://www.independent.co.uk/envir
caught by Montreal traffic camera
onment/snowy-owl-picture-snowweather-montreal-canadaa6801816.html

24

Justin Bieber - Sorry (PURPOSE : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f
The Movement)
Rh_vgS2dFE

25

Video shows fight at McDonald's as https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/art
worker beats customer over free icle-5994973/McDonalds-workersoda
beats-customer-free-soda-US.html

26

The Biggest Undercover Dairy https://vimeo.com/340292407
Investigation in History - Fair Oaks
Farms and Coca Cola

27

LP - Lost On You [Official Video]

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h

301

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

n3wJ1_1Zsg
28

These guys made a homemade https://www.trendszilla.net/2018/06/2
swimming pool literally from 2/these-guys-made-a-homemadescratch
swimming-pool-literally-fromscratch/

29

CNN's Anthony Bourdain Dead at https://www.cnn.com/2018/06/08/us/
61
anthony-bourdain-obit/index.html

30

Only People With OCD Scored https://viralhatch.com/index.php/2018
15/15 In This Impossible Spelling /04/19/only-people-with-ocd-scoredTest
15-15-in-this-impossible-spellingtest/

Table 2. The first thirty pieces of content listed in my archive, also the top thirty most shared. They fall roughly into
the three major categories of the tripartite schema.

In sum, viral social media content has dominant features. It veers toward either the
sentimental and ethical or the corrosive and political, and it satisfies desires for
sensation, self-actualization, and aesthetic delectation. Many of those features’
dominance, moreover, can be seen as a product of the content’s more basic
distinguishing quality: its pursuit of prosumption. I’ll discuss only three examples,
relevant to my subsequent discussion of the uplifting anecdote. First, social media
content’s particular tendency toward sentiment and — by extension — ethics, is
fitting. Content and sentiment, in general, go well together. As per its pejorative
definition, content is utilitarian, designed to achieve economic aims. Sentiment is
commonly defined as “didactic rather than mimetic,” designed to persuade more
than accurately depict.22 Social media content, in particular, still more
appropriately lends itself to the sentimental. Indeed, the aesthetic is ideally suited
to inspire prosumption. It stokes the same two desires for self-expression and
connection that compel shares, comments, and likes. When we react to sentimental
media (as opposed to, say, pornography), we want to publicly own our feelings —
self-congratulation, as many have noted, is central to sentiment’s reception.
Moreover, we are liable to want to commune with others — sentiment’s standard
byproduct, as Joanna Dobson has put it, is a “desire for bonding.” 23 Unsurprising,
then, not only that social media content is so often sentimental, but also that the
platforms and hubs that circulate it embrace the communal aesthetic. Facebook
302

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

creates “friendiversary” videos chronicling past digital interactions between users;
Buzzfeed and Bored Panda exhort content creators to “join the . . . Community,”
without promise of employment or pay.24 In place of monetary compensation, they
offer a saccharine ideal of amateur creativity: “What I love about Bored Panda,”
one contributor writes in a promotional blog post, “is that it’s almost entirely usergenerated . . . It’s so much more emotionally engaging than hearing about
something from a journalist.”25
Other major features of content follow clearly from its core pursuits, namely, its
focus on the self and on artifice or craft. That a type of entertainment designed to
operate as part of its audiences’ public image would emphasize the self is true
almost by tautology. Quizzes are so popular on social media because their results
can be shared. Prosumption’s pursuit also motivates an emphasis on artifice.
Content relies, for its profits, on audiences’ engagement in acts of self-expressive
making. Naturally, then, it glorifies the activity. The link between idealizing
amateur creation and attracting digital responses need not be subtle. Videos that
depict influencers baking bread or braiding hair will often directly ask viewers to
respond by posting their own attempts.26 Bored Panda’s brand, meanwhile, is not
only sentimental, but also sentimental about do-it-yourself or nonprofessional
creativity (“entirely user-generated”).
The genre that I call the “uplifting anecdote” is not merely abundant, but
representative, as the two major schemata under discussion suggest. Consider its
relationship to each schema. The uplifting anecdote keys directly into what the first
schema tells us is content’s major tendency: toward the sentimental, domestic, or
heartwarming. The content genre concerns a sentimentalized entity (like a puppy
or mother) and tells a saccharine story that ends happily. The uplifting anecdote
genre also keys into all three of the categories of content under the second schema,
satisfying demands for sensation, self-improvement, and aesthetic experience. Its
affinity with the first should be obvious — it always tells an allegedly true,
remarkable story. Its affinities with the second and third concerning self and craft
are less so. In this essay’s next section, I will establish those less conspicuous
affinities and discuss their consequences for the particular type of ethics that the
content genre promotes.

303

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

Ethics and the Uplifting Anecdote
The uplifting anecdote is not a wholly novel form of popular entertainment.
Generally, it resembles a large body of prior sentimental media, from Uncle Tom’s
Cabin to the sitcom’s “very special episode.” More particularly, it is preempted by
a smaller collection of media that is both sentimental and anecdotal, like the
saccharine TV advertisement (“ . . . Priceless”) or political speech’s call-out
segment (“Let me tell you about my good friend Jim, from Georgia . . . ”).
Contributors to the “Viral Texts Project” at Northeastern have discovered what
may be the uplifting anecdote’s clearest ancestor. Setting out to discover the
nineteenth-century version of “viral texts” — or texts that spread from newspaper
to newspaper — they identified the genre that they call the “vignette”: a short, true
story that is often, like the uplifting anecdote, saccharine or heartwarming. One
popular nineteenth-century vignette, for example, tells the story of a widower’s
discovery of a deathbed letter from his late wife.27
Like most of its precursors, the uplifting anecdote concerns itself with ethics. In
general, sentimental media invoke the ethical in one of two ways (there are others).
They aim to inspire sympathetic or altruistic feelings toward the vulnerable parties
on whom, as Fisher notes, they often focus. Or they invite audiences to take
pleasure in the depiction of those feelings, particularly in the context of familial or
proto-familial relations (between mothers and children, friends who are like sisters,
etc.). Sometimes, such responses are presumed — Dickens assumes his readers’
capacity to sympathize with dying children. Sometimes, they are compelled —
Beecher Stowe attempts to awaken her readers’ latent compassion for enslaved
Americans. The uplifting anecdote invokes ethics in a similar way. In general, it
relies on audiences’ feelings of sympathy for diminutive figures — dogs, infants,
children — who are in peril. It relies, also, on audiences’ feelings of moral
approval when some heroic person or animal saves the day. More often than not,
such feelings are assumed. The genre mostly asks audiences to feel quasiuniversal, uncontroversial forms of sympathy, for parentless puppies, harried
mothers, or varied types of ugly ducklings. In a much smaller number of cases,
they compel more divisive responses, asking audiences to feel in ways that code
politically right or left. An uplifting anecdote from Breitbart, for example, asks
audiences to celebrate a gun owner’s heroism (“Concealed Permit Holder Stops
Attempted Mass Shooting in Chicago”). An uplifting anecdote from Buzzfeed asks
304

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

audiences to sentimentalize the struggle for LGBTQ rights (“This Gay Couple ReCreated their Pride Parade Photo Seven Years Later and it Has People
Emotional”).28
Nevertheless, uplifting anecdotes specifically, like content genres generally, differ
from their print or television precursors. They do so on the same grounds, in that
they profit immediately, and directly, by inspiring “prosumption.” For this reason,
they promulgate a particular, and arguably problematic, variety of ethics. In the
subsequent paragraphs, I will make this point by drawing not only on close
analysis of uplifting anecdotes, but also on the results of a final digital
experiment.29 For this experiment, I trained a Naïve Bayes classifier on a handlabeled dataset of the headlines of 1022 uplifting anecdotes and of 1022 other
pieces of content. The classifier, trained using ten-fold cross-validation, could
distinguish between the two groups of headlines with 76.7 percent accuracy, on the
basis of some trends (this rate surpasses that achieved by randomized labeling —
or the “null baseline” — at 51.03 percent; it is also comparable to rates achieved
by similar experiments).30 A sample of these trends are depicted in Table 3,
showing the five words most and least likely to indicate uplifting anecdote
headlines, as expressed by a ratio (the number of appearances in uplifting anecdote
headlines over the number of appearances in other headlines, adjusted to prevent
dividing by zero). Many of these results simply confirm the uplifting anecdote’s
nature as I have defined it, and on the basis of which the tagging was done. They
show, for example, that uplifting anecdote headlines are more likely than those of
other content to refer to sentimentalized beings, particularly children and dogs.
They also show that uplifting anecdotes are, by and large, at odds with the major
classes of politically divisive content. Three of the four words least predictive of
uplifting anecdote headlines were “Trump,” “Donald,” and “President” (though
those results are influenced by the abundance of those words). Other of the
classifier’s results, however, are more unexpected. Those results inform my
subsequent analysis.
Words Most Likely to Odds
of Words Least Likely to Odds
of
Appear
in
Uplifting Appearing Appear
in
Uplifting Appearing
Anecdotes
Anecdotes
puppy

21.000

donald

305

0.0769

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

homeless

21.000

ideas

0.0769

saves

16.000

trump

0.0808

child

15.000

president

0.0833

kitten

15.000

easy

0.1000

Table 3. The top five words most and least likely to appear in an uplifting anecdote's headline, as per the Naïve
Bayes classifier's results.

In general, where critics have discussed the ethics of sentimental media, they have
tended to do one — or both — of two things. Where they have praised sentimental
media’s ethics, they have focused on its sincere pursuit of moral persuasion: its
ability to make audiences sympathize with, and potentially assist, members of
vulnerable groups. Fisher, for example, has argued that though sentimental novels
like Uncle Tom’s Cabin may engage in forms of stereotyping that seem distasteful
in retrospect, such crude depictions are a necessary first step toward humane
consideration.31 Where critics have critiqued sentimental media’s ethics, they have
focused on its economic aims: how, in pursuit of profit, it flatters its audiences into
narcissistic quietism. That is Ann Douglas’s argument, which condemns the
sentimental as a consumerist aesthetic, designed to indulge audiences in the
shallow, self-satisfied feelings. James Baldwin famously describes those feelings
as the “ostentatious parading of excessive and spurious emotion.”32 Put another
way, critics’ positive or negative evaluations of sentimentalism have often hinged
on how completely they conceive of it as conforming to a definition of content in
the pejorative sense. Unsurprising, then, that the uplifting anecdote merits
something less like the first mode of critical celebration and something more like
the second mode of critical censure.
It does so, though, in its own particular manner. Thanks to its pursuit of
prosumption, it promotes a shallow, inert sort of ethics, equating moral action with
aesthetic self-expression. It does so, first, by means of its aforementioned emphasis
on the self (as per the second schema). Uplifting anecdotes differ from some if not
all other sentimental media by virtue of one of their key features: their happy
endings. Rather than focus primarily on suffering — inviting audiences to mourn
— they focus more on the heroic acts through which that suffering is alleviated —
inviting audiences to celebrate. They then equate those heroic acts with the acts of
306

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

emotive self-expression through the sharing, liking, and commenting that they
attempt to inspire. Consider, for example, the following comparison, between one
classic type of sentimental media — a Save the Children Ad — and a particularly
viral, uplifting anecdote: “Mexican Bakers Make Pan Dulce For Hundreds of
Harvey Victims After Being Trapped By Floods” (Figure 2).33 The primary and
most overt aim of the Save the Children ad (to oversimplify only slightly) is to
encourage charitable contributions — for this reason, it dwells on the child’s
suffering. Indeed, this is the approach that most GoFundMes take. The main aim of
the uplifting anecdote, however, is to compel not only consumption, but also
prosumption. For this reason, the anecdote focuses less on the bakers’ own heroic
act than it does on the positive response that the bakers’ heroism is inspiring, both
on and offline. Rather than describe or interview the bakers themselves, the
anecdote’s text moves from quoting their kvelling manager to recapitulating social
media responses to their feat: “thousands of people reacted to the bakers’
‘heartwarming’ feat on social media,” the article’s text reports, before quoting
gushing comments at length. 34 That text flanks an image, not of the bakers, but of
a Facebook post about the event, featuring their image. The uplifting event being
narrated, here, is less the bakers’ generosity than its cyber-celebration, in which the
viewer can also now participate.

Figure
2: The Save the Children advertisement says, "please give" while the uplifting anecdote says, "please share."

The classifier provides additional evidence for this idea, in one of the more
interesting trends that it reveals: relative to non-uplifting anecdote headlines,
uplifting anecdote headlines are distinguished by the frequency with which they
refer, in meta-fashion, to the very processes of content circulation. They are 5.5
times more likely to use the word “internet” (as in “the internet is going crazy over
307

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

. . . ”, “ . . . broke the internet”); 4 times more likely to use the word “viral” (“This
viral story . . . ”); and 5 to 10 times more likely to use various words that
preemptively describe the content’s emotional impact (“touching,” “adorable,”
“sweet,” “wow,” “heartwarming,” “powerful,” etc.). This abundance of metadiscussion is very likely the result of their insistence on an equation between ethics
and online prosumption.
Indeed, uplifting anecdotes tend to equate moral action not only with selfexpression, but also with the amateur acts of aesthetic creation and curation that
prosumption involves. (Here we see the genre’s emphasis on artifice or craft.) The
classifier provides an initial indication of this trend. It suggests that uplifting
anecdote headlines, even more than those of other content, use certain words to
connote aesthetics or making. They’re particularly likely, for example, to use the
words “beauty” (7 times more likely) or “beautiful” (3.7), to use words that call
attention to their visual medium like “pictures” (8) or “photo” (3.8), or to use other
words that suggest acts of making or their results, “sing” (5.5), “write” (4),
“written” (4), etc. Whether uplifting anecdotes refer to aesthetics or making more
than other content, in any case, is not as important as the fact that they do so
excessively. Indeed, they enfold the idea of artifice into their ethical system in two
ways. First, they frequently describe acts of moral heroism that are also acts of
amateur creation. Here are but a small sample of anecdotes that do so: a man takes
photos of himself in a pink tutu to cheer up his sick wife; a woman draws pictures
celebrating her boyfriend’s love; a man makes cartoons celebrating his relationship
with his girlfriend; a gay couple creates photo montages of themselves at Pride; a
man creates photo montages of his dog and cat who are best friends; a man splices
together Harry Potter clips, featuring the character Severus Snape, making people
“feel things”; a child signs a Christmas concert in ESL for her deaf parents; a man
signs a wedding song in ESL for his (not deaf) daughter; a mother invents a
harness for disabled children; a boy invents a device to cool down hot cars after he
learns of one killing an infant; and so on.35
Second, they equate moral heroism not only with creation, but also with curation:
the recognition and dissemination of aesthetically pleasing or beautiful entities that
might be involved in sharing, liking, or commenting on content. Here, the uplifting
anecdote enacts its most dramatic elision of the ethical and aesthetic. As an
example, consider one of the most abundant subgenres of uplifting anecdote. In
this subgenre, some human or animal not previously regarded to be beautiful or
308

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

desirable is acknowledged, recognized, or depicted — stirringly, heroically — as
such. The content may subvert invidious stereotypes regarding what is beautiful or
attractive, but may also inadvertently affirm them by assuming they are shared.
Examples include “Girl Mistakes Bride for Real Life Princess From Book She’s
Holding and the Reaction Melts Everyone’s Hearts” (the bride, unlike the princess
in the girl’s book, is black), “This Woman Was Nervous About Her Photoshoot
With Fiancé, But The Results Won the Internet” (the woman is overweight, and the
photographer celebrated rather than hid that fact), “Teen With Down Syndrome is
determined to become a Model” (she succeeds), “Teen Bullied for Her Incredibly
Dark Skin Color Becomes a Model, Takes the Internet By Storm,” and “Rare
Kitten Born With Two Faces Grows Into the Most Beautiful Cat Ever.” 36
Audiences can enact the aesthetic recognition that those stories praise in recursive
chains of shares, comments, and likes. The examples reveal an increasingly
pervasive attitude that to have one’s human worth recognized is to be deemed an
appropriate candidate for sexual objectification. That puzzling millennial ideology
has gained traction among so-called “incels” and members of other erotic online
subcultures. The analysis also supports an armchair observation that social media
is in part responsible for the post-circa 2010 fixation on the ethics of representation
in pop culture, as much if not more than in other realms (politics, professions). I
am thinking here of #OscarsSoWhite or the celebration of the “strong female
protagonist.” A medium bent on compelling users to engage in representational
acts, unsurprisingly, invests the symbolic realm with supreme moral import.
Of course, not all social media users embrace the uplifting anecdote’s moral
implications. Even the dissent that the genre inspires, however, is often colored by
its ethics. To be sure, some reject the genre from a position beyond the pale of its
presumptions. They tend to vocalize a classic critique, which might apply to any
type of sentimental media: that emphases on personal altruism or sympathetic
feeling can serve as narcissistic distractions from the realer, more pressing
problems of politics. A recent uplifting anecdote, for example, which described a
CEO’s $22,000 contribution to the relief of Philadelphia students’ school lunch
debts, inspired this type of response. Celebrating the CEO’s generosity, some
argued, distracted from the deeper issue of the Republican party’s anti-welfare
policies opposing free lunch programs and debt relief.37 Others, however, take
issue with uplifting anecdotes from perspectives that accept more of — indeed, are
inspired by — their particular premises. Consider, for example, one logical
consequence of the uplifting anecdote’s consistent suggestion that all moral action
309

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

occurs on the plane of symbolic self-expression. If this is the case, then the
predominant ethical crime is no longer either inaction or incorrect action: rather, it
is false self-depiction. Indeed, much of the ethical debate that goes on, in the realm
of social media content, concerns how sincere, accurate, or authentic a person’s
performance appears to be. Such authenticity is at stake in the classic complaint of
the internet nihilist or “troll,” who objects to all inevitably self-serving “virtue
signaling.” It is also at stake in the objection that users tend to levy (if any) at
otherwise uncontroversial uplifting anecdotes (indeed, this type of response is
more typical than that which the school lunch story inspired). Take, for example,
the debate that “This Guy Travelled The Country In a Pink Tutu Just to Make His
Wife Laugh During Chemo” provokes. Commenters consider whether the man —
who posts photos of himself in the tutu — does so really to amuse his sick wife, or
more properly for the public attention.38 Such responses to the uplifting anecdote,
among others that it enables or inspires, will be discussed in this essay’s final
section.39

Trolls and Tragedies
One way to track content’s effects on the broader culture — beyond, say, the
sociological survey — is to observe how its forms and ideologies infiltrate other
media. Perhaps even more so than prior new forms of popular entertainment like
TV, radio, or film, content is in a unique position to influence other types of
cultural artifacts. Today’s novelists, filmmakers, and TV writers, among others, do
not simply consume content. They also create content and publicize their work
through the content machine. Naturally, they translate content’s aesthetics and
concepts into their other work. Indeed, many are creating novels, films, or TV
shows that emulate or respond to the uplifting anecdote. Katja Blichfeld and Ben
Sinclair, for example, creators of the HBO show High Maintenance (which
originated on YouTube), regularly write episodes that are extended uplifting
anecdotes.40 Literary author Teju Cole, after writing an essay critiquing an iteration
of the content genre (“White Savior Complex”), has published a collection of
captioned photography, Blind Spot, that (however inadvertently and distinctly)
elevates the Humans of series, that original cyber compendium of uplifting
anecdotes.41

310

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Here, I’ll briefly discuss two works that, in addition to channeling the uplifting
anecdote, illuminate some implications of its ethics: NBC’s hit sitcom The Good
Place and George Saunders’s Booker Prize-winning novel Lincoln in the Bardo.
To begin with, the TV show and novel both take place in afterlife spaces — the
“Good Place” and “Bardo” — that are loose (and perhaps even inadvertent)
allegories for social media. Those spaces, like social media, are virtual worlds in
which persons of uncertain ontological status — neither dead nor alive — are
drawn together through time and space. Here, as in Dante’s Inferno or on Facebook
or Twitter, questions of ethics are paramount: each character subjects his or her
past life to moral scrutiny. Unlike Dante’s ethereal beings, however, and more like
today’s Facebook or Twitter users, the denizens of the Good Place and Bardo are
subject to not already decided, but rather ongoing ethical assessments. In the Good
Place, residents are daily awarded a numerical score for the quality of their actions;
as the series progresses, the significance of their old lives fades and their postdeath conduct takes on increasing importance. In the Bardo, the dead must
embrace more selfless states of mind in order to ascend to some higher, unknown
realm. Together, then, the TV show and novel allegorically symptomatize the same
phenomenon: the fact that, today, social media platforms perform a quasitheological function. Surveilling eyes of digital “friends” motivate moral activity in
much the same way that divine judgment once did.
More particularly, the TV show and novel, through their adaptations of the
uplifting anecdote, reflect upon social media’s distinct ethics. Each, to begin with,
was in some literal sense inspired by an uplifting anecdote. Michael Schur, creator
and director of The Good Place, attributed the idea for the show to a viral piece of
content that he inspired. After a man filed an unnecessary insurance claim of $836
against Schur, Schur told the man that, if he dropped the claim, Schur would
donate the money to Katrina victims. The story went viral and then morphed into a
crowdfunding campaign (perhaps the only type of uplifting anecdote that demands
some variety of real and not merely symbolic response).42 Saunders, meanwhile,
avowedly based Lincoln in the Bardo on a nineteenth-century iteration of the
genre, a news story describing the tender manner in which Lincoln mourned his
son Willie’s death. 43 That link between the novel’s origins and the content genre
might seem only tenuous, were it not for Saunders’s documented fascination with
content. Saunders — as I’ve discussed in more detail, elsewhere — began to
mention uplifting anecdotes with some frequency when, in 2000, he began to “get
all [his] news from [AOL].”44 Thereafter, he generated multiple parodies of the
311

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

predominant stories, involving “dogs calling 911 [or] gifted hogs who play the
cello” (e.g. “Mother Kills Pit Bull Mauling Son With Spatula,” “Lover Kills Shark
Swimming Towards Daughter With Spear Gun,” etc.).45 After he joined Facebook
in 2011, he began to write fiction that resembled the uplifting anecdotes that
regularly circulated on his page (e.g. an article relaying the story of the parents of
the fallen immigrant soldier Humayan Khan, who were notoriously assailed by
then-candidate Donald Trump). Many of his subsequent short stories have plots
that resemble those typical of the content genre — the first and last stories of Tenth
of December, for example, concern boys who save their neighbors from rape or
suicide.
The Good Place and Lincoln in the Bardo also both incorporate the uplifting
anecdote in other ways. Characters on The Good Place make frequent reference to
such viral ephemera, comparing the ethically satisfying existence that the show’s
version of heaven promises to the feeling that such content evokes. Shortly after
our protagonist Eleanor Shelstrop (played by Kristen Bell) arrives at the Good
Place, she and the other new residents watch a PowerPoint style presentation
delivered by their neighborhood’s “architect” Michael (played by Ted Danson).
The first version of this presentation is sponsored by “otters holding hands”; a
second version compares living in the Good Place to “the way you feel when you
see a chimpanzee and a baby tiger become friends.”46 Michael soon claims that his
favorite flavor of frozen yogurt available in the Good Place is the comically
abstract “when a soldier comes home to his dog.”47 Other examples abound. To
name but one more: after Eleanor and her Good Place roommate, an ethics
professor named Chidi, fall in love, they watch a video compilation of brief
moments from throughout the show when one of them was particularly kind or
affectionate with the other, à la Facebook’s “friendiversary” videos.48
In Saunders’s Bardo, meanwhile, characters communicate with one another largely
via short, status-update style monologues, many of which tell saccharine personal
tales that resemble the uplifting anecdote. Indeed, many invoke the popular social
media thematics of erotic or aesthetic recognition. On the novel’s first page, for
example, one of its two ghostly protagonists, Hans Vollman, tells the story of how
he, a gentle old man, was wed to a young and beautiful girl. Meek as a lamb — in
sentimental and perhaps anachronistically “woke” fashion — he found himself
unable to impose himself upon her sexually: “I could see her fear and . . .
distaste.”49 Thanks to his kindness, she did eventually fall in love with him. But on
312

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

the day when they are about to consummate their marriage, he became “sick” (or,
as we understand, died). Next, Roger Bevins III, the novel’s second protagonist,
tells the story of how when he was a young man on earth, he finally surrendered to
his homosexual impulses and took up with a lover named Gilbert. When Gilbert
left, he attempted suicide. But half way through the act, in a classic sentimental
trope far predating the internet (think It’s a Wonderful Life), he realized how
beautiful life was.50 Other characters have similar tales to tell: Captain William
Prince, after betraying his wife, repents and reforms; the young Elise Traynor, who
died in adolescence, replays happy scenes with suitors, one of whom she might
have married one day.
The novel and the TV show, moreover, depict worlds pervaded by the variety of
ethics that social media in general, and the uplifting anecdote in particular,
promote. Ethics, in the Good Place and Bardo, is ubiquitous and self-conscious but
also anemic. In neither world are questions of ethics, to any meaningful degree,
questions about real consequences; no action, up to and including murder, seems to
be final. Indeed, in both worlds, characters can take almost no meaningful actions.
In the virtual world of the Good Place, everything done can be undone. In one
episode, for example, Michael kicks a resident’s dog into the sun; no matter, the
beloved pet can be reconstituted from the ether.51 Janet, the “helper,” heartrendingly pleads for her life every time she is rebooted, but reappears, better than
ever. The Good Place’s four principal inhabitants — Eleanor, Chidi, Tahani, and
Jason — end up, in the show’s second season, living their first few weeks in the
Good Place over and over, their memories wiped clean with each reboot. The
merely virtual status of action, here, in addition to reflecting the show’s allegorical
relation to social media, underscores one of its broader theses: that people’s power
to do good, in a complex and contemporary world, is radically restricted. In the
show’s later seasons, the characters learn that earthly denizens’ “goodness” scores
are today lower than ever before, since almost no action can be taken that is not in
some way enmeshed in a corrupt system.52 Meanwhile, Saunders’s ethereal
protagonists are similarly impotent. They yearn to affect the earthly realm,
attempting, by multiple means, to help Lincoln accept his son Willie’s death (and
thereby prevent the boy from becoming imprisoned in the Bardo). Ultimately,
though, they must wait for Lincoln to find peace and acceptance on his own. Here,
perhaps, in these characters’ inability to influence the commander-in-chief is
another reflection of the same contemporary sense of civic impotence.

313

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

Where real, consequential action is unavailable, ethics — as on social media —
becomes a matter of personal identity or self-expression. All that matters are inner
states and the authenticity with which we outwardly represent them. On the first
season of The Good Place, for example, the question of Eleanor’s goodness
quickly becomes the question of whether she truly means the positive actions that
she takes. If, for example, she throws a party for her neighbors simply because she
wants to earn goodness points, then the action is valueless: she earns none. If,
however, she performs the action out of real altruistic feeling, then it will increase
her score.53 This is deontology by necessity; in a content-based world where all
ethical actions are symbolic, they can have no value beyond the intent behind
them. Indeed, the show’s concern with intent is a direct product of its origins as an
uplifting anecdote. Receiving — even soliciting — so much digital attention for his
own act of altruism made Michael Schur reconsider its ethical status. A New York
Times Magazine piece describes his ethical progress via free indirect discourse:
“He suspected that his mission was not, perhaps, entirely righteous. There was an
element of grandstanding to the gesture, of moral one-upmanship, and Schur spoke
about it with his family and colleagues and even professors of ethics. He became
fascinated by the ways people can rack up ethical credits and debits.”54
For the denizens of the Bardo, too, “virtue” or the degree to which one is capable
of earning a place in some rumored next world (presumably some sort of heaven,
though we never learn) becomes a matter of the quality of one’s inner life. The
Bardo inhabitant’s cardinal sin is not the one we would expect to see in some
afterlife antechamber, or limbo — the middling sum of one’s good and bad ethical
actions in life. Rather, their sin, again, is inauthenticity, a habit of dissembling born
of inadequate self-knowledge. One reason that characters like Bevins and Vollman
remain in the Bardo is that they cannot even admit to themselves and others that
they are dead. Vollman refers to himself as still “sick” or in his “sick box”;
whenever Bevins is on the verge of saying something like the word “dead,” he
omits it or is interrupted.55 Meanwhile, Lincoln’s son Willie is in danger of never
ascending to the next world precisely because Lincoln cannot admit to himself that
the boy is really gone. These characters will earn their place in the next world (or,
in Lincoln’s case, earn Willie’s place), not by doing good deeds, but rather by
achieving authentic self-expression: by knowing what they are and saying it plain.
In both worlds, as on social media, the equation of ethics with self-expression is
also an equation of ethics with aesthetics or erotics. One of The Good Place’s
314

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

typical running jokes involves suggesting that major moral crimes and aesthetic
faux pas are equivalent. The original list of actions that send people to the bad
place, for example, commingles “genocide” (bad) with “use ‘Facebook’ as a verb,”
“ruin opera with boorish behavior,” or “tell a woman to smile” (all also bad).56
Other crimes cited throughout the show include liking the Red Hot Chili Peppers
and “wearing jeggings as pants.”57 While these are clearly jokes, the show
sincerely inhabits its aestheticized value system. On the level of its thematics, it
never reaches a clear, philosophical verdict regarding what types of actions are
good (beyond loving one’s friends); on the level of its production, however, it
clearly endorses an ethics of egalitarian representation. The diverse cast of four
main characters, of different races and classes, are seamlessly drawn together in
what YouTuber T1J has aptly called one of Michael Schur’s “postracial
dreamworlds.”58 The show also makes a point of ostentatiously working against
televisual stereotypes, reminding us frequently, for example, that its Asian male
protagonist, Jason, is both conventionally attractive and spectacularly unintelligent.
The show also endorses a Platonic intermingling of the ethical and erotic realms,
suggesting that the primary path to virtue is by loving and being loved (Eleanor
becomes good by loving Chidi). Lincoln in the Bardo, as already suggested, also
embraces the uplifting anecdote’s elision of positive action and erotic recognition.
As their personal, uplifting anecdotes suggest, the characters crave kindnesses
from others that are amorous in nature.
Something is amiss, however, in these ethical worlds. Both The Good Place and
Lincoln in the Bardo register the superficiality at the heart of their social medialike afterlives. Both the show and novel reach their climaxes when the protagonists
realize that the worlds they occupy are not what they seem. In the final episode of
the first season of The Good Place, Eleanor realizes that the Good Place is in fact
the Bad Place. Though she, Chidi, Tahani, and Jason have been assuming that they
inhabit a heaven designed for good people (with only Eleanor and Jason realizing
that they do not belong there), Eleanor now realizes that the ethereal space is, in
fact, actually an elaborate torture chamber of Michael’s devising. Meanwhile, the
denizens of the Bardo learn that, though they had believed that they were in some
sense still alive, they are, in fact, dead. In both cases — but particularly in the case
of The Good Place, which aired shortly after the 2016 election — the collective
anagnorisis seems to represent the recent revelation, on the part of educated liberal
netizens, that social media was not what it had seemed. Far from a “Good Place,”
where liberals could gather together to share New York Times articles and display
315

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

— or debate — their “wokeness,” it was in fact a “bad place” where Russians and
neo-Nazis spread malicious misinformation.
More particularly, these twin climatic turns imply dissatisfaction with the
narcissism at the heart of social media’s ethics. Eleanor’s revelation punctures the
assumption, on the part of the Good Place’s denizens, that they are, in fact, so
good. Tahani the heiress philanthropist and Chidi the ethics professor — unlike the
less idealistic, but more self-aware Eleanor and Jason — have happily accepted
that they belong among the heroic few. What they haven’t realized is that their own
goodness, like social media’s prosumption-driven notion of virtue, has been as
empty and insubstantial as the frozen yogurt on which they have been subsisting.
Indeed, the fact that this airy confection was so abundant in the Good Place, the
show jokingly implies, should have provided a clear indication of its nonparadisiacal nature.
Similarly, Saunders implies that the inhabitants of the Bardo, perpetually sharing
their personal tales, have been mired in a pathological self-concern. The characters,
more than anything, want to be rendered visible to those around them. “What did
we want?” asks Vollman when Lincoln comes to see his son Willie for the first
time. “We wanted the lad to, see us,” he answers. To be seen, in this case, would
be to live vicariously through Willie’s having received an amorous or loving
attention: “To be touched so lovingly, so fondly,” says Bevins. “We were perhaps
not so unlovable as we had come to believe.” It would also, by extension, be to
return from the dead. It’s “as if one were — ” Bevins says, omitting the implied
word: “alive.”59 Understandable desires, to be sure. But for Saunders they turn out
to be deforming. Each character is misshapen in a manner that corresponds to the
story that he or she repeats, and its expressed desire for romantic recognition.
Vollman, for example, has a gargantuan, floating erection; Bevins has many
scattered eyes, ears, noses, and fingers, which represent his final, sensuous desire
to evade his death. More to the point, obsessive self-expression, Saunders implies,
is what keeps these characters stymied. “To stay,” Vollman and Bevins together
note, “one must deeply and continuously dwell upon one’s primary reason for
staying . . . one must be constantly looking for opportunities to tell one’s story.”60
The Good Place and Lincoln in the Bardo take two different critical stances that
social media’s ethics compel, one of which — the novel’s — is more promising
than the other. The Good Place, at first, may seem to endorse proactive alternatives
316

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

to social media’s collapsing of the ethical and expressive. It suggests that though
doing good is increasingly difficult, people might still manage to “try,” even in the
face of damnation (“we can try,” Eleanor rallies her companions). Trying, by and
large, will consist in forging companionate bonds with other persons, or honoring
— in a phrase that the show borrows from T.M. Scanlon — “What We Owe to
Each Other.” In reality, however, the position that the show most energetically
embraces is not that of the sentimental contractualist — the version of Eleanor who
exhorts her friends, fueled by love, to make an effort. Rather, it is that of the
internet “troll” — the version of Eleanor who punctures other characters
sanctimony, rejecting their shallow, self-serving ethics in the name of a gleeful
nihilism. Eleanor, by the show’s estimation, begins a “bad” person. And yet her
actions never truly offend. Her allegedly evil deeds, most of which involve
puncturing the pomposity of self-important moralizers, are played for cathartic
laughs. In one flashback, she refuses her boyfriend’s request that they boycott a
“problematic” coffeeshop; the meek man pales and wilts in the presence of her
charismatic gusto (“I know you’re going to break up with me,” she says. “I saw the
emails you wrote to your dad.”)61 In another scene, she refuses to participate in the
nauseating group activities that her coworkers organize.62 In a third scene, a
heroically single-minded teenage Eleanor denies affiliation with every social
group, including the so-called disaffected — she immediately rebuffs the selffashioning revolutionary who approaches her. “It was so cool the way you told off
those posers,” he says. She responds with one word: “No.”63 Meanwhile, the only
one of the four “bad” Good Place protagonists whose behavior seems actually
designed to offend is Tahani. Tahani, despite having objectively accomplished far
more good than Eleanor has ever done by raising millions of dollars for charity, is
more palpably objectionable because of how smug she seems about it. When
Tahani first comes to Eleanor’s house with an elaborate, expensive housewarming
gift, Eleanor displays her characteristic cynicism by mistrusting the gesture. And
yet the show makes clear whose side we should be on. Tahani, the Instagram
philanthropist, is the show’s minor villain (at least in early seasons) because she
believes that she belongs in the Good Place. Eleanor, the savvy spotter of cons (“I
know liars,” she says), is the show’s social media-era hero because she knows that
they both do not.64
But where The Good Place, like Milton’s Paradise Lost, is in spite of itself of the
devil’s — or of the troll’s — party, Saunders’s Lincoln in the Bardo is more
earnest in its quest for an adequate, alternative ethics. To be sure, the book operates
317

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

from within the world of social media’s insubstantial morality, equating all virtue
with self-discovery and self-expression. But it also often resists that prosumptiondriven ethics. It does so, moreover, without devolving into trollish nihilism.
Rather, it attempts to re-focus public attention away from the heroism that inspires
self-congratulation, and back onto the suffering that inspires action. In the moment
when Lincoln finally accepts his son’s death, the denizens of the Bardo, too, can
see who they are: namely, that they are dead. Suddenly, and by implication as a
result, they are released from the deforming prisons of their self-concern —
Vollman and Bevins, for example, suddenly appear as normal human beings,
without gigantic floating erections or thousand-fold eyes.65
At the same time, Saunders revises the uplifting anecdote to similar effect. The
novel, as we have seen, opens with Vollman and Bevins’s sentimental tales. But
these tales, as yet, have no endings. Vollman remains — at least in his view — on
the brink of returning to the world to consummate his marriage. And Bevins, too,
believes that he might return, perhaps to rekindle his affair with Gilbert. Saunders
might have given these stories, like their social media counterparts, uplifting
conclusions, granting these two characters the erotic recognition they desire.
Instead, he does the opposite. Now, we suddenly learn a fact about which Vollman
has been in denial: that his young wife has long since married another man, the
“great love of [her] life,” and she has already died and passed through the Bardo,
thanking Vollman for putting her “on the path to love.” Gilbert, we meanwhile
learn, left Bevins for another man. At Bevins’s expense, the two lovers “[shared] a
laugh.”66 Here, the reader can feel no relieved self-satisfaction, as the scene
inspires a far less complacent feeling: sympathetic pain at unredeemed loss.
New mass media, twentieth-century critics often complained, threatened the
individual — Horkheimer and Adorno bemoaned the culture industry’s
homogenizing effects; David Foster Wallace critiqued television’s capacity, among
other things, to make the many one (he titled his essay on the topic, “E. Unibus
Pluram”). In the social media era, a distinct sort of danger emerges: content, rather
than threatening to overwhelm the individual viewer, insists on the perpetual
presence of her symbolic self. As a result, it introduces a distinct sort of ethical
terrain: a world in which all action is symbolic and expressive, and the measure of
its quality is its perceived authenticity. From within this world, at least two types
of critical stances, beyond the rejection of ethics (and sentiment) wholesale in the
name of a more pressing politics, are available. There is that of the troll, which
318

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

forecloses the possibility of ethical action still further; or there is that of the
tragedian, which strives to open it up.

References
1

This process is described in José Van Dijck, The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2013). Van Dijck calls the contemporary social media economy of data sharing, and its
concomitant cultural manifestations, the “Culture of Connectivity.” He explains how various early 2000s
developments, like YouTube, Flickr, and Facebook’s growing size and going public, gave it birth. The whole book
describes the process. For a good overview, see section 2 of the first chapter, 5-9.
2

Adam Bowie, “Content,” Adambowie.com, October 4, 2009.

3

This word is used widely across the literature. I may have first encountered it, in particularly well-defined form, in
Christian Fuchs, Social Media: A Critical Introduction (London: SAGE Publications, 2013).
4

Henry Jenkins, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green, Spreadable Media: Creating Value and Meaning in a Networked
Culture (New York: New York University Press, 2013), 1-5, 34.
5

Jia Tolentino, Trick Mirror: Reflections on Self-Delusion (New York: Random House, 2019), 26, 14.

6

Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Updating to Remain the Same: Habitual New Media (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2016), 21.

7

Neil Postman, Amusing Ourselves to Death (New York: Penguin Books, 2006), 6.

8

It is worth noting that the examination of viral content’s content, though it defies normal practice in contemporary
media theory, does not actually require a theoretical break with McLuhan. For McLuhan, the content of every
medium is another medium. This has led Lisa Gitleman, for example, to argue that today’s media theory should
focus on a broader array of media, including “genre.” By focusing on viral content’s content, my project might
simply be said, in media theory’s terms, to be focusing on such smaller-scale media, like genre, form, style, etc. See
Lisa Gitleman, Paper Knowledge: Toward a Media History of Documents (Durham: Duke University Press, 2014),
2.
9

I compiled this database using two different methods. First, I looked at lists published on the content analysis
service Newswhip’s blog. See “The Whip: Social Data and Ideas From the Newswhip Team,” Newswhip, accessed
June 25, 2019. These lists, published (approximately) monthly and annually between 2014 and 2019, indicate the
most shared/engaged with pieces of content, and top performing outlets (i.e., producing the most shared/engaged
with content total) on Facebook or Twitter during individual months or years. (Blogposts might be titled, for
example, “These Were the Top Shared Publishers on Facebook in June 2019,” or “The Most Shared Stories on
Twitter in 2015”). I collected data from all lists from the period July 2018-2019. Second, I conducted searches using
a proprietary tool called Buzzsumo (Harvard’s Charles Warren center funded my subscription), which lets

319

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

subscribers discover how many times pieces of content were shared on four platforms: Facebook, Twitter, Reddit,
and Pinterest, during some specified period within the past five years. Users can use the tool to search by content
domains (NYTimes), by article title, by author, or by title keywords (No blank search, returning the most shared
content writ large, is permitted; this is also true on Facebook’s similar CrowdTangle tool; that is, going directly to
the Facebook API/Crowdtangle tool would not circumvent this issue). Restricting my searches to the period of July
2014 to July 2019, I searched, first, for content published by all of the domains listed by Newswhip as ever having
produced the most shared content during a month between July 2014 to July 2019, and added all resultant pieces of
content earning 500,000 or more total shares to my database. I then searched the content by generic title keywords
(the top 100 most frequently used words in the English language, according to the OED, except “a” and “I” as one
letter searches were not permitted), to get viral content from a broader sample of outlets; again, I added all pieces of
content earning 500,000 or more shares to my database.
10

While focusing not simply on the headline text, but also on the text of the content itself would be, in theory, ideal,
the task is unmanageable. Computationally scraping the individual pieces of content from the thousands of different
content sources in my archive would be a task that would hardly take less time than doing so by hand. While it
would be possible to scrape the viral content from only a handful of sources (e.g., only the NYtimes or Buzzfeed) in
an efficient programmatic fashion, this would change the nature of the corpus in undesirable ways. It would turn the
study from a study of viral content writ large into a study of viral content as produced by particular outlets.
11

“Incredible Dog Who Saved the Life of Newborn Baby Has Lasting Legacy,” Resharewworthy, accessed October
21, 2019; Akvile Petraityte, “30 Suicide Survivors Share How Happy They Finally Are,” Bored Panda, accessed
October 21, 2019.
12

Jill Abramson, Merchants of Truth: The Business of News and the Fight for the Facts (New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2019), 117.
13

This number is based on the hand labeling of the dataset that I did for the Naïve Bayes classification described in
section two of this article. I hand labeled 9,000 pieces of content randomly selected from the archive; 1022 were
uplifting anecdotes.
14

Walter Benjamin, The Work of Art in the Age of Its Technological Reproducibility and Other Writings on Media
(Cambridge: Belknap Press, 2008).
15

Philip Fisher, Hard Facts: Setting and Form in the American Novel (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987),
5-6.
16

Stephen Messenger, “Man Builds Dog Train to Take Rescued Pups Out on Little Adventures,” The Dodo,
September 22, 2015; “I am Faithful Wife, What Kind of Wife Are You?”, Bitecharge, accessed on October 27,
2019.
17

Theodore Shoebat, “Hilary Clinton: Christians in America Must Deny Their Faith in Christianity,” Shoebat.com,
April 24, 2015; Jennifer Rubin, “Donald Trump May Be the Dimmest President the U.S. Has Ever Had,” The
Independent, June 1, 2017.
18

I ran this topic model on the 205,147 content headlines in my archive. I used the tool MALLET from the
command line, running the topic model on the 205,147 documents comprising 2,399,270 words. I tried multiple

320

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

different numbers of topics (from 50 to 500, by intervals of 50), at multiple different optimization intervals (20-60,
by tens). I used the standard stop-word list. I found that most of these experiments produced very good results (part
of why I didn’t need to adjust stop words). The topics were remarkably straightforward and easy to assign labels to,
likely due to the simplicity of the documents. I decided that the most coherent list of topics were 150 topics at an
optimization interval of 20. They are the topics on which this discussion is based. There are problems with the
method of Topic Modelling, as many have discussed. For one thing, the model will produce slightly different results
each time it is run. The topics produced should not be taken as an objective and comprehensive snapshot of all of the
topics appearing in the corpus, but rather as a strong indication of some major themes and a starting point, on that
basis, for closer analysis. Here, the topic model begins to indicate, to me, that the content divides into two major
sorts of categories. Other methods like word counts and, not least, close looking, then confirm this suggestion. For
an introduction of the topic modeling method into humanistic disciplines, and a pattern for my own work, see
Andrew Goldstone and Ted Underwood, “The Quiet Transformations of Literary Studies: What Thirteen Thousand
Scholars Could Tell Us,” New Literary History 45, no. 3 (2014): 359-384. For more discussion see Ted Underwood,
“Topic Modeling Made Just Simple Enough,” The Stone and the Shell, April 7, 2012.
19

For this analysis, I downloaded Saif Mohammad’s NRC Lexicon, a spreadsheet which includes English language
words labeled, via crowdsourcing, by the major emotions that they indicate. There are eight emotions: “Anger,”
“Anticipation,” “Disgust,” “Fear,” “Joy, “Sadness,” “Surprise,” “Trust.” I then used this spreadsheet to tally the
number of words associated with each emotion appearing in each of my content headlines. I could then calculate, by
simple addition, the proportional quantities of words related to each emotion amongst the headlines as a whole. For
more on how Mohammed compiled the Lexicon, as well as the rationale for the choice of these eight emotions (on
the basis of psychological research), and their in-context definitions, see Saif Mohammad and Peter Turney,
“Crowdsourcing a Word-Emotion Association Lexicon,” Computational Intelligence, 29 no. 3 (2013): 436-465.
Because sentiment analysis is mostly used to identify whether online reviews are positive or negative, most
sentiment analysis lexicons label words only as positive or negative. Mohammad’s is one of the few that attempts
more complex labeling. Obviously, there are flaws with this method. The choice of eight emotions, no matter how
grounded in psychological research, will always be partial. Moreover, however consistent the taggers’ abilities to
match words to emotion-labels, those labels will no doubt still fail to capture the words’ affective valences in varied
contexts. In sum, these results should not be accepted as independently authoritative, but can, as they do here,
supplement other findings. For examples of prior usage of sentiment analysis in Digital Humanities research, see
Inger Leemans et. al., “Mining Embodied Emotions: A Comparative Analysis of Sentiment and Emotion on Dutch
Texts, 1600-1800,” DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly 11, no. 4 (2017) and Matthew Jockers, “The Ancient World
in Nineteenth Century Fiction: or, Correlating Theme, Geography, and Sentiment in the Nineteenth Century Literary
Imagination,” DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly 10, no. 2 (2016).
20

Uplifting/Heartwarming: 4; Politics: 42; Unfortunate Event: 5; Race and Identity/Controversy: 9; Disasters: 1.

21

Uplifting/Heartwarming: 0.05202; Politics: 0.3535; Unfortunate Event: 0.0503; Race and Identity/Controversy:
0.06621; Disasters: 0.00495.
22

Jane Tompkins, Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of American Fiction, 1790-1860 (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1986), xvii.
23

Joanna Dobson, “Reclaiming Sentimental Literature,” American Literature 69, no. 2 (1997): 267.

24

“About Buzzfeed Community,” Buzzfeed, accessed October 27, 2019.

25

Include castells quote here

321

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

26

This is a convention of the YouTube How-To Genre, typically appearing in the final seconds. Crafty Gemini
teaches us to bake bread, and then asks us to post about our results: “If you throw in different ingredients or things, I
would love to hear your comments” (The Crafty Gemini, “How to Make Bread From Scratch – No Breadbaker
Needed,” YouTube video, 15:15, April 3, 2011); Yana Irbe teaches us to braid hair, and then asks us to indicate that
it worked for us with a “like” or comment (Yana Irbe, “Front Row Braid,” YouTube video, 7:49, April 27, 2017).
27

See the description of the third chapter of the Viral Text Project’s upcoming University of Minnesota Press
Manifold book, Going the Rounds, at their website: Ryan Cordell and David Smith, Viral Texts: Mapping Networks
of Reprinting in 19th-Century Newspapers and Magazines, viraltexts.org (2017). Or see coverage of the project in
Wired. Greg Miller, “Here’s How Memes Went Viral – In the 1800s,” Wired, November 4, 2013.
28

Awr Hawkins, “Concealed Permit Holder Stops Attempted Mass Shooting In Chicago,” Breitbart, April 20,
2015; Tanya Chen, “This Gay Couple Re-created Their Pride Photo 24 Years Later and it Has People Emotional,”
Buzzfeed.News, June 20, 2017.
29

I culled a random selection of 9,000 entries from my archive. I hand labelled the 9,000 entries, producing a
labeled collection of 1022 uplifting anecdotes. I ran a Naïve Bayes classifier, from scikit learn (MultinomialNB), on
the titles of the 1022 uplifting anecdotes and 1022 randomly selected non-uplifting anecdotes to see if it could
distinguish between them with reasonable accuracy. I used tenfold cross-validation and found that the best
performing classifier (3603 max features, stopwords included), distinguished between the headlines with 76.71
percent accuracy. I then made a table sorting the features that the classifier used (here, all individual words), in order
of their utility to its operations, or in order from those with the highest ratio of appearances in uplifting anecdote to
non-uplifting anecdote headlines to those with the lowest, adjusted to prevent 0s in the denominator (number of
appearances in uplifting anecdote headlines + 1/number of appearances in non-uplifting anecdote headlines +1).
This data is a good index of which words are most predictive of uplifting anecdote or non-uplifting anecdote
headlines, but it is arguably skewed by the overall abundance of each word in the corpus. For more discussion of
this issue, see the experiment on which I model this one, in the fourth chapter of Andrew Piper, Enumerations: Data
and Literary Study (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2018), 94-118.
30

Successful Digital Humanities classification experiments often have results in the approximate range of 70-95
percent accuracy. Ted Underwood and Jordan Sellers, for example, have trained two models to distinguish between
high-brow and popular nineteenth-century poetry with 77.5 and 79.2 percent accuracy. See Ted Underwood and
Jordan Sellers, “The Longue Durée of Literary Prestige,” Modern Language Quarterly 77, no. 3 (2016): 321-344;
Hoyt Long and Richard Jean So have trained models to distinguish between haiku and non-haiku poems with 91 and
86 percent accuracy. See Hoyt Long and Richard Jean So, “Literary Pattern Recognition: Modernism Between Close
Reading and Machine Learning,” Critical Inquiry, 42, no. 2 (2016): 235-267.
31

Fisher, “Hard Facts,” 5-6.

32

Ann Douglas, The Feminization of American Culture (New York: Farrar Straus & Giroux, 1977), 3-17; James
Baldwin, “Everybody’s Protest Novel,” in Notes of a Native Son (Boston: Beacon Press, 2012), 14.
33

Save The Children, “Tomorrow Advert,” YouTube video, 1:00, posted November 2015; Chloe Farand, “Mexican
Bakers make Pan Dulce For Hundreds of Harvey Victims,” The Independent, August 30, 2017.
34

Farand, “Mexican Bakers.”

322

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

35

Maycie Thornton, “This Man Travelled the Country in a Pink Tutu Just to Make His Wife Laugh During
Chemo,” Buzzfeed, December 10, 2013; Vaiva Vareikaite, “Girlfriend Secretly Illustrates Everyday Life with Her
BF, He Uploads Comics Online and They Go Viral,” Bored Panda, accessed October 22, 2019; Lucy Yang, “This
Guy Drew Himself and His Girlfriend as Characters in Ten Famous Cartoon — and the Internet is Loving His
Creativity,” Insider, January 10, 2018; Tanya Chen, “This Gay Couple”; Bored Panda Staff, “This cat and Dog Love
Travelling Together and Their Pictures Are Absolutely Epic,” Bored Panda, accessed October 22, 2019; Matilda
Miranda, “Crushingly Sad Harry Potter Re-edit Makes us Feel Really Bad for Snape,” The Loop, accessed October
22, 2019; The Jackson Sun, “Girl Signs Christmas Concert for Deaf Parents,” YouTube video, 1:52, posted
December 2013; Caroline Bayard, “Dad Refused to Give Speech at his Daughter’s Wedding Did This
Instead…OMG,” Little Things, accessed October 22, 2019; Lis Neporent, “Mom Invents Harness to Help Disabled
Kids Walk,” ABC News, March 25, 2014; Kristen Dahlgren and Daniel Arkin, “11-Year Old Texas Boy Invents
Device to Prevent Hot Car Deaths,” NBC News, June 29, 2017.
36

Ruta Grasyte, “Girl Mistakes Bride for Real Life Princess From Book She’s Holding and the Reaction Melts
Everyone’s Hearts,” Bored Panda, accessed October 22, 2019; James Caunt, “This Woman Was Nervous About
Her Photoshoot With Fiancé, But The Results Won the Internet,” Bored Panda, accessed October 22, 2019; Dovas,
“Teen With Down Syndrome is determined to become a Model,” Bored Panda, accessed October 22, 2019; “Teen
Bullied for Her Incredibly Dark Skin Color Becomes a Model, Takes the Internet By Storm,” Artfido, accessed
October 22, 2019; Rokas Laurinavicius, “Rare Kitten Born With Two Faces Grows Into the Most Beautiful Cat
Ever,” Bored Panda, accessed October 22, 2019.
37

Farron Cousins, “Republicans Love to Punish People for Being Poor,” ROF, August 3, 2019.

38

Comments include the likes of “I don’t know where the donated money goes and it may not matter. What he is
doing for his wife is exceptional. I know he is a photographer, and there may be some ego & narcissism in his
efforts, but you have to give him credit for his efforts to entertain his ailing spouse. Good on ya', Bob.” Or, “She’s in
chemo and he's galavanting around the world in a tutu and now self-promoting his book/calendar. Uhhhhh, yeah.
That's real love there.” alisonw17, letter to the editor, Buzzfeed, December 10, 2013, buzzfeed.com/maycie/this-guytravelled-the-country-in-a-pink-tutu-just-to-make-h; Filtered, letter to the editor, Buzzfeed, December 10, 2013,
buzzfeed.com/maycie/this-guy-travelled-the-country-in-a-pink-tutu-just-to-make-h.
39

Gyan Yankovitch, “This Model With Down Syndrome is Going to Walk at New York Fashion Week,” Buzzfeed,
August 17, 2015. Sample comment: “I worry tho that these big names do things like this I'm sorry to say as a form
of sympathy don't you think?” ChrisJGG, letter to the editor, Buzzfeed, August 17, 2015,
https://www.buzzfeed.com/gyanyankovich/madeline-is-going-to-nyfw.
40

See, e.g, Season 3 episodes 7-8. Episode 7, “Dongle,” includes a plotline in which in immigrant construction
worker has a crush on a bodega employee; episode 8, “Proxy,” concerns a couple who, after a miscarriage, find a
creative way of healing (a doll). Thanks to Rachel Vogel for these observations. High Maintenance, season 3,
episode 7, “Dongle,” directed by Silas Howard, written by Katja Blitchfeld and Ben Sinclair, aired March 3, 2019,
HBO; High Maintenance, season 3, episode 8, “Proxy,” directed by Chioke Nassor, written by Katja Blitchfeld and
Ben Sinclair, aired March 10, 2019, HBO.
41

Teju Cole and Fazal Sheik, Human Archipelago (Göttingen: Steidl, May 2019); Teju Cole, Blind Spot (New
York: Random House, 2017). The book, like the series, offers readers a succession of brief experiences of
anthropological tourism (“Tivoli,” “Lagos,” “Btouratij,” its first three captions are titled). But where the Humans of
series, with its emphasis on the sentimental, face-to-face encounter, invites illusions of mastery, Cole’s oblique
depictions of human figures compel confrontations with “blind spots.”

323

CONTENT -ERA
ETHICS

42

Sam Anderson, “What Makes the Good Place So Good?” The New York Times Magazine online, Oct 4, 2018.

43

Saunders discusses having been inspired to write the novel by a nineteenth-century news clipping with Stephen
Colbert. The Late Show With Stephen Colbert, “Are We being Kind Enough to Donald Trump? Author George
Saunders Has Answers,” YouTube video, 7:17, February 2017.
44

Tess McNulty, “Content Culture: Literature in an Age of Viral Media,” PhD diss., (Harvard, 2022).

45

George Saunders, “American Psyche,” The Guardian, July 27, 2007.

46

The Good Place, season 1, episode 1, “Pilot,” directed by Drew Goddard, written by Michael Schur, aired
September 19, 2016, NBC; The Good Place, season 2, episode 1, “Everything is Great!” directed by Trent
O’Donnell, written by Michael Schur, aired September 20, 2017, NBC.
47

The Good Place, season 1, episode 7, “The Eternal Shriek,” directed by Trent O’Donnell, written by Michael
Schur, aired October 20, 2016, NBC.
48

The Good Place, season 3, episode 12, “Pandemonium,” directed by and written by Michael Schur, aired January
24, 2019, NBC.
49

George Saunders, Lincoln in the Bardo (New York: Random House, 2017), 3.

50

Ibid., 25-7.

51

The Good Place, season 1, episode 2, “Flying,” directed by Michael McDonald, written by Michael Schur, aired
September 19, 2016, NBC.
52

Ibid., “Pandemonium.”

53

The Good Place, season 1, episode 11, “What’s My Motivation,” directed by Lynn Shelton, written by Michael
Schur, aired January 12, 2017, NBC.
54

Anderson, “What Makes the Good Place so Good?”

55

Saunders, Bardo, 47.

56

The Good Place, “Pilot.”

57

The Good Place, season 1, episode 8, “Most Improved Player,” directed by Tristram Shapeero, written by
Michael Schur, aired October 27, 2016, NBC; Ibid., “What’s My Motivation.”
58

T1J, “Tina Fey’s Weird Obsession With Racial Humor,” YouTube video, 11:27, December 23, 2018.

59

Saunders, Bardo, 70.

324

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

60

Ibid., 255.

61

The Good Place, season 1, episode 3, “Tahani Al-Jamil,” directed by Beth McCarthy-Miller, written by Michael
Schur, aired September 22, 2016, NBC.
62

Ibid., “Flying.”

63

The Good Place, season 1, episode 9, “Someone Like Me as a Member,” directed by Dean Holland, written by
Michael Schur, aired November 3, 2016, NBC.
64

Ibid., “Pandemonium.”

65

Saunders, Bardo, 257.

66

Ibid., 327.

325

