Journal of
Cultural Analytics

April 20, 2021

The Goodreads “Classics”: A
Computational Study of Readers,
Amazon, and Crowdsourced Amateur
Criticism
Melanie Walsh and Maria Antoniak
Melanie Walsh, Cornell University
Maria Antoniak, Cornell University
Peer-Reviewer: Katherine Bode
Data Repository: 10.7910/DVN/GJYYKE

ABSTRACT
This essay examines how Goodreads users define, discuss, and debate “classic” literature by computationally
analyzing and close reading more than 120,000 user reviews. We begin by exploring how crowdsourced
tagging systems like those found on Goodreads have influenced the evolution of genre among readers and
amateur critics, and we highlight the contemporary value of the “classics” in particular. We identify the most
commonly tagged “classic” literary works and find that Goodreads users have curated a vision of literature
that is less diverse, in terms of the race and ethnicity of authors, than many U.S. high school and college
syllabi. Drawing on computational methods such as topic modeling, we point to some of the forces that
influence readers’ perceptions, such as schooling and what we call the classic industry — industries that
benefit from the reinforcement of works as classics in other mediums and domains like film, television,
publishing, and e-commerce (e.g., Goodreads and Amazon). We also highlight themes that users commonly
discuss in their reviews (e.g., boring characters) and writing styles that often stand out in them (e.g.,
conversational and slangy language). Throughout the essay, we make the case that computational methods
and internet data, when combined, can help literary critics capture the creative explosion of reader responses
and critique algorithmic culture’s effects on literary history.

What is a classic? This is “not a new question,” as T.S. Eliot acknowledged more
than seventy-five years ago.1 More than simply “not new,” this question now feels
decidedly old, hashed out, and even passé. Perhaps most glaringly outdated is the
word “classic.” Literary scholars don’t often use the term anymore, at least not as a
serious label for literature “of the highest rank or importance.” 2 In 1991, John
Guillory declared that the term classic was “all but retired.”3 The label, according to
Guillory, signified not only a “relatively uncritical regard for the great works of
Western literature” but the “precritical era of criticism itself.”4 Instead, in academic
conversations, the ardent language of the “classics” has largely been displaced by

Journal of Cultural Analytics 4 (2021): 243-287. doi: 10.22148/001c.22221

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

the more critical vocabulary of the “canon,” which frames literary significance more
carefully as a product of cultural selection.
Yet the question — what is a classic? — remains surprisingly powerful in the
twenty-first century because the classics are alive and thriving on the internet, in the
marketplace, and among readers, even if not in universities or among academics.
Contemporary readers not only use the term “classic,” they use it a lot and often have
strong feelings about it. “*To all the snobs on goodreads*: I read a CLASSIC,” one
reader heralded in a Goodreads review of George Orwell’s 1984, brandishing the
term six more times before concluding: “I read a CLASSIC. wohooooooo.” Another
Goodreads user, Bren, rated Vladimir Nabokov’s Lolita two out of five stars and
explained: “I get that this a classic and book snobs who read this will sig[h] in
indignation but I do not care…Lolita is a classic but it just is not MY classic.” 5 Yet
another disgruntled reader panned J.D. Salinger’s The Catcher in the Rye and
ventured that “anybody who tells me this is a classic or that I ‘don't understand it’
can kiss the whitest, fattest part of my ass.” Why do contemporary readers use the
term “classic” so frequently and so passionately? The classics, it turns out, are at the
heart of some of the most significant developments in contemporary literary history,
including the rise of digital literary culture, online amateur criticism, and internet
corporations with bookish investments like Goodreads and Amazon. There are few
places more instructive for understanding these developments and the contemporary
classics than Goodreads, the focal point of this essay.
With more than 120 million members, Goodreads is the largest social networking
site for readers on the internet and a subsidiary of Amazon, one of the wealthiest and
most influential corporations in the world. On Goodreads, internet users can
categorize any book as a “classic” and publish their own responses to it — gushing
praise, mean takedowns, critical analyses, snarky parodies, personal narratives, and
more. Among thousands of literary categories on Goodreads, “classics” is one of the
top ten most popular and includes some of the most rated and reviewed books across
the entire site. The frequently tagged “classic” To Kill a Mockingbird (1969), for
example, has been rated by Goodreads users more than 4 million times, a level of
engagement only surpassed by two other books: J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter and
the Sorcerer’s Stone (1997) and Suzanne Collins’s The Hunger Games (2008).
This flood of Goodreads classics content represents an excitingly large archive of
amateur criticism and reader responses, an opportunity for scholars to hear
nonacademic readers’ voices in ways that were difficult if not impossible before the
244

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

internet. For example, understanding how readers felt about classics in the Victorian
period is difficult because there is little first-hand evidence from Victorian readers,
as Richard D. Altick once explained: “The great majority of the boys and girls and
men and women into whose hands fell copies of cheap classic reprints did not leave
any printed record of their pleasure. Only occasionally did the mute, inglorious
common reader take pen in hand.”6 Far from this “mute, inglorious” Victorian
common reader, the twenty-first-century readers of Goodreads regularly publish
records of their readerly pleasure and displeasure on the internet. Beyond providing
a rich archive of reader responses, Goodreads also raises questions about whether its
social network might enable a democratization of the classics. The classics, after all,
have historically been defined by those in power and excluded “the interests and
accomplishments of minorities, popular and demotic culture, or non-European
civilizations,” as Ankhi Mukherjee describes.7 To what extent are millions of
Goodreads users from around the globe now remedying or replicating such historical
exclusions?
Though Goodreads data is a boon for literary criticism and a potentially
transformative development for literary culture, it is also a boon for corporations.
Amazon’s looming shadow over Goodreads data helps bring into focus a more
financially minded definition of a classic, perhaps best summarized by poet and
literary critic Mark Van Doren. A classic, Van Doren said, is simply “a book that
remains in print.”8 For the twenty-first century, we might update Van Doren’s
definition and say that a classic is simply a book that continues to make money in
whatever form it takes, whether as a print book, audiobook, e-book, screen
adaptation, or as the subject of millions of online book reviews. In fact, it is clear,
based on the Goodreads reviews that we analyze in this essay, that industries such
as film, television, publishing, e-commerce, and tech not only profit from the classics
but profit from each other in a circular loop, benefiting from the reinforcement of
works as classics in other mediums and domains. Considered together, this classics
industry, as we call it — a formulation inspired by and indebted to Simone Murray’s
“adaptation industry” as well as Pierre Bourdieu’s theories of cultural production 9
— proves to be one of the strongest influences on Goodreads users’ perception of
the classics.
The tensions between democratic potential and corporate exploitation that we
observe in the Goodreads classics are characteristic of many social networks and
Web 2.0 platforms, which fundamentally rely on user-created content. These
245

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

dynamics have been studied extensively by scholars of fandom, new media, and
digital culture, among other fields.10 Yet how social network dynamics and the
internet economy are reshaping literary culture, in particular, is still a relatively new
conversation, led by critics such as Murray, Aarthi Vadde, Lisa Nakamura, and
Mark McGurl.11 By examining Goodreads reviews in this essay, we hope to
contribute to this emerging conversation. We also hope to add a quantitative, datadriven perspective to the discussion by curating a collection of more than 120,000
Goodreads reviews and by using computational methods to study some of the most
salient trends. We believe that digital literary culture is an area that especially
rewards the convergence of digital humanities methods and contemporary literary
criticism. The massive number of Goodreads ratings and reviews is part of what
makes the platform worthy of study and financially lucrative, but also what makes
Goodreads difficult to understand in broad strokes. Digital humanities and cultural
analytics scholars have demonstrated, however, that computational methods can
help us better understand cultural phenomena at scale. By employing these methods
on Goodreads data in particular, we build on previous Goodreads-related DH
research by Karen Bourrier and Mike Thelwall, J.D. Porter, Alexander Manshel, and
Laura McGrath, James F. English, Scott Enderle, and Rahul Dhakecha, Allison
Hegel, and Andrew Piper and Richard So, among others.12
Scale is not our only motivation for using computational methods. The contemporary
book world, including but not limited to Goodreads and Amazon, is increasingly
governed by algorithms and data, which presents a number of challenges for
contemporary literary scholars. “Clearly the leviathan that is Amazon exerts
immense influence on the global book trade,” as Simone Murray contends, “but how
are scholars to document, much less critique, algorithmic culture’s self-reinforcing
effects on cultural selection if denied access to the workings of the algorithm’s
engine-room?”13 To provide one answer to Murray’s urgent question, we believe
that computational methods can supply a way of documenting, understanding, and
critiquing algorithmic culture and its effects. By collecting and analyzing Goodreads
data with computational methods, we are able to see, for example, that Goodreads
only publicly displays a small fraction of its data. We are also able to detail some of
the specific social effects of the platform’s default sorting algorithm, which
prioritizes the most liked and most commented on reviews. This digital infrastructure
produces a feedback loop among Goodreads reviews, in which reviews that receive
attention continue to receive more attention ad nauseam.

246

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

This feedback loop is a fitting metaphor for the consecration of the classics on
Goodreads more broadly. Though Goodreads users technically define the classics
for themselves, their definitions are clearly shaped by a reciprocal system of
reinforcing influences — old institutions like high schools, universities, and
publishing houses as well as new institutions like Amazon. The result is a readerproduced vision of the classics that is surprisingly less diverse, in terms of authors’
race and ethnicity, than those represented by U.S. literature syllabi, though more
diverse in terms of genre, including more genre fiction, young adult fiction, and
adapted fiction. Though Goodreads users seem strongly influenced by traditional
institutions and the capitalist marketplace, they nevertheless demonstrate enormous
creativity in finding ways to make this critical conversation their own — parodying
and panning different literary styles, reliving and reimagining high school English
classes, pushing back against the perceived arbiters of literary authority, and publicly
changing their minds.
To close this introduction, we foreground our own approach to Goodreads data, since
the exploitation of user data is a central subject of this essay. We have chosen not to
publicly share our dataset of Goodreads reviews, though we have shared the code
that we used to collect data from the Goodreads website, and we have obtained
explicit permission from each Goodreads user who is directly quoted in this essay.14
We believe that ethical approaches to user data will continue to be one of the most
important conversations for digital humanities and cultural analytics research, and
we expand on our choices further in the Appendix.

The Classics “Shelf”: Genre, Hashtag, Advertising Keyword
This essay understands Goodreads users to be readers as well as “amateur critics,” a
framing that we draw from Aarthi Vadde, Melanie Micir, and Saikat Majumdar,
among others.15 As Vadde explains, “The ease and ubiquity of digital publishing
have enabled the ‘mass amateurization’ of the critical, creative, and communicative
arts, allowing amateurs to bypass the gatekeeping practices of specific
institutions…and to perform acts of photography, journalism, or authorship without
necessarily identifying with a specialized guild or benefitting from its resources.” 16
The digital platform of Goodreads similarly allows amateurs to perform acts of
literary criticism, to publish their own analyses and judgements of literature, without
formal training and without access to traditional publishing venues. The three main
ways that Goodreads users act as amateur critics are by rating books between one
247

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

and five stars, by reviewing books in 15,000 characters or less, and by “shelving”
books into categories. We begin with an extended discussion of Goodreads “shelves”
because they are one of the primary ways that users define the classics and that
Amazon profits from the classics.
The first telling clue about these shelves is that the Goodreads website fluidly refers
to them as “shelves,” “genres,” and “tags.” This slippery relationship points to a
significant evolution of genre among readers and amateur critics in the twenty-first
century: genre is being subsumed and reshaped by tagging. Tagging is a common
system for classifying and organizing content on the internet, in which users tag
digital content with their own free-form descriptions, keywords, and metadata (think
hashtags on Twitter). The shelf system on Goodreads is a social or collaborative
tagging system because users can apply different tags to the same content, essentially
crowdsourcing book categorization. Prior computational social science and natural
language processing research has explored how these collaborative tagging systems
produce “folk taxonomies” or folksonomies, classification systems built by
communities from the ground up.17 Literary genre, in the hands of internet users
equipped with tagging systems, has similarly blossomed into a grassroots taxonomy
that incorporates conventional genres but also splinters into new genres,
microgenres, publishing industry categories, reception metadata, hashtags, and
more.18 For example, a Goodreads user named Candace tagged Margaret Atwood’s
The Handmaid’s Tale (1985) as “classics” and six other distinct categories (fig. 1):
“wtf-did-i-just-read,” “kindle-unlimited,” “dark-themes,” “favorites,” “listened-toaudio-version,” and “age-difference.”19 Fellow Goodreads users tagged The
Handmaid’s Tale as “science-fiction,” “fantasy-sf,” “man-booker-shortlistlonglist,” “tv-series,” “re-read,” and “feminism,” among many other tags. As these
examples demonstrate, Goodreads users mold conventional genre to better represent
their tastes, values, and cataloguing needs. Allison Hegel argues that Goodreads
shelves may also help readers “articulate their identities to others and connect with
larger communities.”20 According to Jeremy Rosen, most literary critics today
understand genre “not as a rigid category that texts ‘belong to’ or a set of rules that
one must abide by, but as a flexible set of techniques that can be adapted according
to the needs of its users.”21 While Rosen’s “users” are mostly authors who mold
genre to create their own literary works, the ambiguous term suggests that others can
use genre, too, including readers and amateur critics. Thus, “classics” emerges as an
important contemporary genre for readers in addition to a label of literary value and
publishing category.
248

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 1: This screenshot displays a Goodreads review of Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale written by a
user named Candace. The red annotations highlight the “Shelves” section of the review, where Goodreads users
can categorize books with their own personal shelves/ genres/ tags. Notably, Candace has shelved The Handmaid’s
Tale in “classics.” The number of likes and comments that this particular review received is also underscored
because it is the basis by which Goodreads sorts reviews by default, which we discuss in more detail in the section
“The Goodreads Algorithmic Echo Chamber.”

Though “classics” is just one Goodreads shelf among thousands, it is one of the most
important and foundational. In the website’s earliest days, the company used
“classics” as their first anchoring example to introduce and explain the shelving
system: “You can create your own personal bookshelves. From classics to
canadabooks, to childrenslit and geek, you can create any category that suits your
personal taste.”22 Ten years later, the classics remained Goodreads go-to example:
“Shelf names range from classics and coffee-table-books to childrens-lit and sci-fi
— you can create any category that suits your personal taste.”23 Because “classics”
supposedly represents the oldest and most traditional literary category, it serves as
an effective foil for any unconventional literary category a Goodreads user might
dream up, and it also invites a mass of readers and amateur critics to participate in a
seemingly elite conversation. The classics thus make the entire shelf system legible
and appealing.
Shelves are also financially lucrative for Goodreads and Amazon, the classics shelf
particularly so. Each time a Goodreads user shelves a book in their personal library,
that user simultaneously shelves the same book in the platform’s massive library of
more than two billion books.24 “Goodreads turns the reader into a worker,” as Lisa
249

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

Nakamura observes, and through shelves, the company crowdsources the enormous
work of organizing two billion books to the masses. 25 By shelving books, Goodreads
users also (more unsettlingly) organize themselves into coherent audience categories
that can be effectively targeted by advertisers. The same shelves that Goodreads
users invent are sold as target keywords, as Goodreads’ informational material for
advertisers shows in Figure 2. These shelves represent not only books but also
people: the Goodreads users who form communities around genres and subject areas,
who read and discuss the books shelved into these categories. Browsing through the
list of advertising “target values” reveals that some of these shelves are fascinatingly
niche like space-opera, mermaids, and reformation-history. Yet other target values
like mental-illness and abuse seem more serious and sensitive, raising the
concerning possibility that vulnerable groups might be targeted by advertisers.
Goodreads flags the “classics” as one of their top 10 most “prominent” genres for
advertisers, putting it in the same company as “contemporary,” “historical-fiction,”
“fantasy,” “fiction,” “manga,” “mystery,” “romance,” “non-fiction,” and “youngadult.” Looking at the top 10 most rated books across the entire Goodreads website
offers one clear picture of this prominence: five of the top 10 are classics (Table 1).

250

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 2: The first page of a four-page document titled “Genre List for Advertisers,” described as “the master
set of genres currently available to be used as target values for your ads on Goodreads.” The “classics” is bolded
as one of the top 10 most prominent genres near the bottom-center of the page. This “Genre List for Advertisers”
document can be found under “Target Advertising” on the “Advertise with Us” section of the Goodreads website.

251

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

Table 1: Top 10 Most Rated Books on Goodreads (December 2020)
Top “Classics”

7.2m

Publication
Year
1997

Suzanne Collins
Stephanie
Meyer
Harper Lee

6.5m
5m

2008
2005

No
No

4.6m

1960

Yes

3.8m

1925

Yes

The Fault in Our Stars

F.
Scott
Fitzgerald
John Green

3.6m

2012

No

1984*
Pride and Prejudice
Divergent
The Hobbit

George Orwell
Jane Austen
Veronica Roth
J.R.R. Tolkien

3.2m
3m
2.9m
2.9m

1949
1813
2011
1937

Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Title

Author

Ratings

Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer’s Stone
The Hunger Games
Twilight

J.K. Rowling

To
Kill
a
Mockingbird*
The Great Gatsby *

No

To fully grasp the significance of Goodreads users’ shelving labor, it is helpful to
compare Goodreads to Netflix, the world’s largest video streaming service. Like
Goodreads, Netflix has a massive microgenre system for its video content, featuring
hyper-specific genres like “Deep Sea Horror Movies” and “Romantic Dramas Based
on Classic Literature.” To assemble these 70,000+ “altgenres,” Netflix “paid people
to watch films and tag them with all kinds of metadata,” as Alexis Madrigal reported
in 2014.26 “When these tags are combined with millions of users’ viewing habits,
they become Netflix’s competitive advantage,” Madrigal argues. “The data can’t tell
them how to make a TV show, but it can tell them what they should be making.”27
By tagging books with their own extremely detailed metadata, Goodreads’ 90
million users perform a similar service for Goodreads and Amazon, but they do it
for free.28

The Classics According to Goodreads Users
When Goodreads users shelve books, they supposedly classify books on their own
terms without direct intervention from the academy, the publishing industry, or
Amazon. Technically, any of the two billion books in the Goodreads library could
become a classic in users’ hands. Yet when we collate the books that Goodreads
users have collaboratively consecrated as classics, we find the strong influence of
school curricula and what we call the classics industry, the interrelated network of
businesses that generate and profit from the classics — such as publishing, film and
252

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

television, and internet corporations like Goodreads itself. To identify this list of
Goodreads classics, we first selected the top 100 literary works tagged as a classic
the greatest number of times by Goodreads users throughout the site’s history (20062019). We then added the top 100 literary works that were tagged as a classic and
most read by Goodreads users in the first week of September 2019 (the week when
we collected our data). The homepage for popular shelves like the classics
prominently features books that were “Most Read This Week,” displaying them even
above the most tagged books in the genre. We decided to include this second group
of books because they are conspicuously promoted by Goodreads and provide a
slightly different perspective on the Goodreads classics — not only what users have
tagged as classics but also which classics users actually seem to be reading. Many
of the 100 most read classics overlap with the 100 most shelved classics, and in total
the list includes 144 unique titles.29

Figure 3: This figure displays the distribution of 144 Goodreads classics by publication date and total number of
Goodreads ratings received as of September 2019. The same plot can be explored in more detail as an interactive
data visualization. Blue points represent literary works most shelved as a classic throughout the history of Goodreads.
Yellow points represent classics most read in September 2019. Red points represent the overlapping titles most shelved
as a classic and most read in September 2019.

253

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

The makeup of the Goodreads classics (figure 3) confirms what Lisa Nakamura
observes about the platform: “Reader tastes reflect the traditional literary canon
more closely than one might expect.”30 These Goodreads classics include canonical
mainstays such as Homer’s The Odyssey (~700 BC) and Shakespeare’s Hamlet
(1603), Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter (1850) and Charlotte Brontë’s
Jane Eyre (1847), F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby (1926) and Virginia
Woolf’s Mrs. Dalloway (1925), J.D. Salinger’s The Catcher in the Rye (1951) and
Vladimir Nabokov’s Lolita (1955). Their publication dates noticeably skew toward
the late-nineteenth and twentieth centuries. More than a third were published after
1945. While the dominant form of literature in these Goodreads classics is fiction,
there is also a small amount of poetry, drama, and non-fiction, such as Kahlil
Gibran’s book of prose poetry, The Prophet (1923), Oscar Wilde’s play The
Importance of Being Earnest (1895), and Anne Frank’s The Diary of a Young Girl
(1947).
Many texts labeled as classics by Goodreads users seem to overlap with English
literature curricula from U.S. grade schools, high schools, and colleges. Though the
Goodreads platform has an increasingly global audience — with notable emerging
userbases in India and the UK — most of its users have historically hailed from the
U.S. and still make up an estimated 40% of sitewide traffic.31 For two rough
estimates of how much the Goodreads classics overlap with school syllabi, we
consulted a recommended reading list from the Advanced Placement (AP) English
program — a common literature curricula in U.S. high schools — as well as a
compilation of college-level English literature syllabi from the Open Syllabus
Project, which draws on syllabi from many countries but predominantly from the
U.S.32 More than a third of the Goodreads classics authors are specifically
recommended by the AP English program, and about half rank within the top 200
most assigned college-level authors.
Yet the Goodreads classics depart from these school-sanctioned lists in two
particularly striking ways. First, the Goodreads classics are considerably less diverse
in terms of the race and ethnicity of their authors. Race is extremely complex and
difficult to reduce to data, especially because racial categories differ across different
societies. However, if we acknowledge this reduction and use racial categories from
the U.S. to reflect the perspective of the majority of Goodreads users,33 then almost
94% of the Goodreads classics authors are white, which makes them whiter than
both the AP recommended authors (70%) and the Open Syllabus authors (80%). The
254

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Goodreads classics include works by six Black writers: Alexandre Dumas, Frederick
Douglass, Chinua Achebe, Zora Neale Hurston, Toni Morrison, and Alice Walker.
There are also works by Laura Esquivel and Gabriel García Márquez, who would
likely be read as Latinx from the perspective of U.S. racial logics, and Kahlil Gibran,
who would likely be read as Middle Eastern or North African from the same
perspective. There are no works by Asian, Asian American, or Indigenous authors.
Further, there are few texts written by authors beyond North America and Europe,
with notable exceptions including Achebe’s Things Fall Apart, Gibran’s The
Prophet, and Márquez’s One Hundred Years of Solitude. This lack of racial and
geographic diversity in the Goodreads classics is not entirely surprising when one
considers the user demographics of Goodreads. Beyond the platform’s U.S.centrism, the racial demographics of its user base skew overwhelmingly white—at
least according to Quantcast, one of the ad industry’s leaders for measuring online
traffic and user demographics. As of June 2020, according to Quantcast, Goodreads
users were 77% Caucasian, 9% Hispanic, 7% African American, 6% Asian, and 1%
other.34 It is crucial to note, however, that Quantcast uses statistical modeling
techniques to predict demographic characteristics such as gender, age, ethnicity, and
income, and, as sociologist Ruha Benjamin argues, companies that “create racial–
ethnic data to be sold to others” deserve intense scrutiny. 35 Quantcast data is
nevertheless used by many companies, including Goodreads, which makes it
important to consider.36 With these purported user demographics in mind, the
predominantly white Western makeup of these reader-produced classics is not
shocking but it is nevertheless startling, and it cautions any outsized faith in
crowdsourced technologies as necessarily or predictably democratizing tools.
The second significant departure from school curricula is the presence of genre
fiction, young adult fiction, and film- and television-adapted fiction. For example,
among the Goodreads classics, we find science fiction and mystery in Frank
Herbert’s Dune (1965) and Agatha Christie’s And Then There Were None (1939);
children’s novels in E.B. White’s Charlotte’s Web (1952) and Frances Hodgson
Burnett’s The Secret Garden (1911); and the source material for iconic film
adaptations in L. Frank Baum’s The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900), Truman
Capote’s Breakfast at Tiffany’s (1958), and Stephen King’s The Shining (1977).
Because most of this genre fiction entered our Goodreads classics list from the “Most
Read This Week” list, it perhaps points to readers’ actual, or at least more typical,
reading habits and tastes.37

255

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

The Goodreads Algorithmic Echo Chamber
Goodreads users have not, on the whole, disrupted or remade the traditional canon
of classics in any clearly radical ways via their crowdsourced shelving practices —
save perhaps for the incorporation of genre fiction. From the perspective of race and
ethnicity, Goodreads users in fact seem to be reinforcing an even whiter and less
diverse canon of classics than one would find in a typical high school or college
classroom today. By analyzing Goodreads reviews in addition to shelf
classifications, we hoped to better understand the forces and influences shaping this
perception of the “classics” — who and what “is responsible for maintaining them
in their preeminent position,” as Jane Tompkins once put it.38 When we turned to
collect and analyze Goodreads users’ reviews, we recognized one clear answer:
Goodreads and Amazon. In this section, we briefly discuss the challenges that we
faced while collecting Goodreads reviews, which we hope will be informative for
others who wish to work with Goodreads reviews in the future. But more importantly
these challenges reveal key insights about Goodreads/Amazon’s proprietary
algorithms and management of user data.
The first key insight is that Goodreads purposely conceals and obfuscates its data
from the public. The company does not provide programmatic (API) access to the
full text of its reviews, as some websites and social media platforms do. To collect
reviews, we thus needed to use a technique called “web scraping,” where one
extracts data from the web, specifically from the part of a web page that users can
see, as opposed to retrieving it from an internal source.39 The Goodreads web
interface makes it difficult to scrape large amounts of review data, however. It’s not
just difficult for researchers to collect Goodreads reviews. It’s difficult for anyone
to interact with Goodreads reviews. Though more than 90 million reviews have been
published on Goodreads in the site’s history, one can only view 300 reviews for any
given book in any given sort setting, a restriction that was implemented in 2016.
Previously, Goodreads users could read through thousands of reviews for any given
book. Because there are a handful of ways to sort Goodreads reviews (e.g., by
publication date or by language), it is technically possible to read through 300
reviews in each of these sort settings. But even when accounting for all possible sort
setting permutations, the number of visible and accessible Goodreads reviews is still
only a tiny fraction of total Goodreads reviews. This throttling has been a source of
frustration both for Goodreads users and for researchers.

256

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Goodreads Classics Reviews

Oldest
Number
of 42,311
Reviews
reviews
Mean Length of 54.6 words
Reviews
Number of Unique 24,163 users
Users
Mean Number of 1.75
Reviews per User reviews/user

Newest
42,657
reviews
91.8 words

Default
42,884
reviews
261.2 words

All
127,855
reviews
136.3 words

33,486 users

17,362 users

69,342 users

1.27
reviews/user

2.47
reviews/user

1.84
reviews/user

Working within these constraints, we collected approximately 900 unique reviews
for each classic book—300 default sorted reviews, 300 newest reviews, and 300
oldest reviews—for a total of 127,855 Goodreads reviews. We collected these
reviews regardless of whether the user explicitly shelved the book as a “classic” or
not. We also explicitly filtered for English language reviews. Despite this filtering,
a small number of non-English and multi-language reviews are included in the
dataset, and they show up as outliers in some of our later results. Compared to the
archives of most readership and reception studies, this dataset is large and presents
exciting possibilities for studying reception at scale. But it is important to note that
this dataset is not large or random enough to be a statistically representative sample
of the “true” distribution of classics reviews on Goodreads. We believe our results
provide valuable insight into Goodreads and the classics nonetheless.

Figure 4: This figure shows the distribution of Goodreads classics reviews by year. The high number of reviews in
2007 and 2019 reflect the fact that, in addition to collecting default-sored reviews, we specifically collected the
“oldest” reviews, most of which were published in 2007, and the “newest” reviews, most of which were published in
2019.

257

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

Figure 5: This figure shows the distribution of Goodreads classics reviews by star rating of the review.

Though the constraints of the Goodreads platform distort our dataset in certain ways,
we tried to use this distortion to better scrutinize the influence of the web interface
on Goodreads users. For example, the company never makes clear how it sorts
reviews by default, but we found that reviews with a combination of more likes and
more comments almost always appear above those with fewer — except in certain
cases when there is, perhaps, another invisible social engagement metric such as the
number of clicks, views, or shares that a review has received. Since we collected
data in multiple sort settings, we are able to go further than this basic observation
and investigate how exactly this default sorting algorithm shapes Goodreads users’
behavior, social interactions, and perceptions of the classics. Based on our analysis,
we found that the first 300 default visible reviews for any given book develop into
an echo chamber. Once a Goodreads review appears in the default sorting, in other
words, it is more likely to be liked and commented on, and more likely to stay there
(fig. 6). Meanwhile the majority of reviews quickly age beyond “newest” status and
become hidden from public view. These liking patterns reveal that Goodreads users
reinforce certain kinds of reviews, such as longer reviews (fig. 7), reviews that
include a “spoiler alert” (fig. 9), and reviews written by a small set of Goodreads
users who likely have many followers (Table 2). If a review is prominently displayed
by the default sorting algorithm, its author may be more likely to go back and modify
this review. More default-sorted reviews included the words “update” or “updated”
than oldest or newest reviews (fig. 8). In one especially interesting updated review,
a Goodreads user raised her rating of Toni Morrison’s The Bluest Eye and apologized
for the way that her original, more negative review offended others and reflected her
white privilege, which other Goodreads users had pointed out.
258

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 6: This figure shows the number of average
likes per review, broken down by Goodreads main
review sort orders. The error bars indicate the
standard deviation across 20 bootstrapped samples of
the books, providing a measure of instability when a
particular book is included or excluded in the dataset.

Figure 7: This figure shows the average
length of reviews, broken down by
Goodreads main review sort orders. The
error bars indicate the standard deviation
across 20 bootstrapped samples of the books,
providing a measure of instability when a
particular book is included or excluded in the
dataset.

Figure 8: This figure shows the number of
reviews that included the word “update” or
“updated,” Goodreads main review sort
orders. The error bars indicate the standard
deviation across 20 bootstrapped samples of
the books, providing a measure of instability
when a particular book is included or
excluded in the dataset.

Figure 9: This figure shows the number of
reviews that included a “spoiler” tag, broken
down by Goodreads main review sort orders.
The error bars indicate the standard
deviation across 20 bootstrapped samples of
the books, providing a measure of instability
when a particular book is included or
excluded in the dataset.

259

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

Topic Modeling Goodreads Reviews
Looking at the list of most popular Goodreads classics and analyzing liking patterns
can only tell us so much about how Goodreads users perceive, define, and discuss
the classics. To know more, we needed to listen to readers’ own critical voices. To
understand the most consistent conversations and overarching themes in Goodreads
classics reviews, we analyzed the reviews with topic modeling, specifically a latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA) topic model: an unsupervised machine learning
algorithm that essentially tries to guess the main themes of a collection of texts.40
We pre-processed our reviews with Laure Thompson and David Mimno’s
“Authorless Topic Model” package to capture the most cross-cutting themes.41 This
package helps to remedy a common problem that occurs when topic modeling a
collection of texts by multiple authors — or, in our case, a collection of reviews
about texts by multiple authors —which is that the resulting topics often pick up on
language specific to individual authors, such as words unique to Shakespeare plays
or to Jane Austen novels. Author-specific topics can be desirable in some cases, but
we wanted to reduce the signal of individual authors in order to amplify readers’
collective voices across the reviews. The final 30 topics produced by the topic model
help us pull out some of the major threads in the Goodreads classics reviews, which
we manually labeled and split into four categories: “The Classics Industry,”
“Literary Themes,” “Literary Qualities,” and “Linguistic Styles.” “The Classics
Industry” includes topics such as “Adaptations & Audiobooks” and “Editions &
Translations” (fig. 10). The “Literary Themes” and “Literary Qualities” categories
point to thematic or stylistic elements that readers’ commonly discuss in their
reviews, including topics such as “War & Adventure” or “Length & Pace” (fig. 11,
fig. 12) Finally, the “Linguistic Styles” category captures both Goodreads users’
writing styles and literary authors’ writing styles, which commonly appear in the
form of quotations. Sometimes the topics even pick up on a fascinating blend of
readers’ and authors’ styles combined. For example, the “Conversational & Slangy”
topic sometimes identifies the quoted voice of Holden Caulfield, The Catcher in the
Rye’s angsty protagonist, but other times it identifies Goodreads users writing in a
satirical Holden Caulfield-style voice (fig. 13).

260

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 10: These are five of the 30 topics produced by our topic model (based on 120,000+ Goodreads reviews of
“classic” texts), which we labeled The Classics Industry. The table displays our hand label for the topic; the most
probable words for the topic; the texts that are most probable for the topic (when we aggregate all the reviews for
that text); and a sample review that ranked highly for the topic, with top words bolded. For readability, we
remove a set of common stopwords from the most probable words.

261

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

262

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 11: These are 11 of the 30 topics produced by our topic model (based on 120,000+ Goodreads reviews of
“classic” texts), which we labeled Literary Themes. The table displays our hand label for the topic; the most probable
words for the topic; the texts that are most probable for the topic (when we aggregate all the reviews for that text);
and a sample review that ranked highly for the topic, with top words bolded. For readability, we remove a set of
common stopwords from the most probable words.

Before fully diving into these topics, we want to briefly elaborate on the topic model
to clarify this method and provoke a thought experiment. How might Goodreads and
Amazon be extracting value from this data using computational methods? By
demonstrating the kinds of patterns that our topic model can detect, we might better
263

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

understand what’s happening in Amazon’s “engine-room,” as Simone Murray puts
it.42 Because the topic model algorithm is “unsupervised,” we do not specify in
advance which topics to look for, only the number of topics to return. The number
of topics that we decided on was a significant and subjective decision. The topic
model is not an objective magic wand but an interpretive tool. We chose 30 topics
because we experimented with different numbers and ultimately found that 30 topics
produced the most coherent and compelling results.
Each topic consists of all the words in every recorded Goodreads review, ranked by
their likelihood of appearing in a Goodreads review assigned to a particular topic.
The most probable words for each topic typically represent a common theme,
discourse, or linguistic style across the Goodreads reviews, such as “women,”
“men,” “woman,” “would,” and “society,” the five most probable words for the topic
that we eventually hand labeled “Gender & Sexuality” (all topics were similarly
hand labeled by us). These topic words may seem, at first glance, simplistic (e.g.,
“men” and “women”) or even arbitrary (e.g., “eyes,” “upon,” and “long”). Yet when
we read through the individual Goodreads reviews that rank highly for each topic,
we can start to understand their significance and critical utility. Simple words, it
turns out, can help detect complex discussions of gender and race, and seemingly
random groups of words can be the unexpected trademarks of particular linguistic
styles. The topic containing the words “eyes,” “upon,” “long,” “light,” “man,”
“heart,” and “world,” for example, ranks highly in Goodreads reviews that include
a quotation from the book being reviewed (fig. 13). These basic words indeed
identify the presence of literary language in a Goodreads review with remarkable
regularity and accuracy, even across a wide range of source texts — from
Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby (“And as I sat there, brooding on the old unknown
world, I thought of Gatsby’s wonder when he first picked out the green light”) to
Morrison’s The Bluest Eye (“God was a nice old white man, with long white hair,
flowing white beard, and little blue eyes”) to Shakespeare’s Macbeth (“cleanse the
stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff which weighs upon her heart”). These results
bolster our confidence that the model is picking up on significant threads even when
the assemblages of topic words do not seem immediately coherent. This ability to
find significant threads playing out in individual Goodreads reviews is one of the
major assets of the topic model for humanistic interpretation. We use the topic model
not only to identify broad patterns in the collection but also to draw specific and
noteworthy examples to the surface and to our critical attention.

264

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 12: These are eight of the 30 topics produced by our topic model (based
on 120,000+ Goodreads reviews of “classic” texts), which we labeled Literary
Qualities. The table displays our hand label for the topic; the most probable
words for the topic; the texts that are most probable for the topic (when we
aggregate all the reviews for that text); and a sample review that ranked highly
for the topic, with top words bolded. For readability, we remove a set of common
stopwords from the most probable words.

265

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

Figure 13: These are six of the 30 topics produced by our topic model (based on
120,000+ Goodreads reviews of “classic” texts), which we labeled Linguistic Styles and
Non-English Reviews. The table displays our hand label for the topic; the most probable
words for the topic; the texts that are most probable for the topic (when we aggregate
all the reviews for that text); and a sample review that ranked highly for the topic, with
top words bolded. For readability, we remove a set of common stopwords from the most
probable words.

By aggregating all ~900 reviews for each classic book, we can also identify the
topics most associated with every book and, conversely, the books most associated
with every topic. The classics that rank highest for the topic we have labeled “Gender
& Sexuality” — which includes words like “women,” “men,” woman,” and
“society” — are literary works that explore subjects related to women’s writing,
266

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

feminism, misogyny, reproductive rights, and lesbian desire: Virginia Woolf’s “A
Room of One’s Own” (1929), Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s “The Yellow Wallpaper”
(1892), Sylvia Plath’s The Bell Jar (1963), Alice Walker’s The Color Purple (1982),
and Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale (1984) (fig. 11). The classics that rank
highest for the topic we have labeled “Race” — which includes words like “white,”
“black,” “society,” and “racism” — revolve around issues such as American slavery,
the effects of anti-Black racism, and the colonization of Africa: Harriet Beecher
Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852), Frederick Douglass’s Narrative of the Life of
Frederick Douglass (1845), Chinua Achebe’s Things Fall Apart (1958), Mark
Twain’s The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn (1884), Toni Morrison’s The Bluest
Eye (1970), and Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness (1902) (fig. 11). These coherent
clusters of literary works, grouped from within the broader 144 classic titles, are
surprisingly intuitive classifications for an unsupervised algorithm trained on
readers’ responses alone, with no access to the texts themselves or to any external
metadata about author, publication, or reception. Further, these clusters paint
impressionistic pictures of the collective reader response to each book. For the handselected group of texts in Figure 14, we can see which books generated more
discussion of classrooms and school and which books generated more discussion of
life and death, which books were more likely to be quoted from and which books
were more likely to inspire gushing declarations of love. By incorporating rating
information, we can also identify which topics corresponded to more positive
ratings, like “Beautiful Writing,” and which to more negative ratings, like
“Unlikeable Characters” (fig. 15). Using computational methods on Goodreads data,
it is thus possible to learn a lot of information about readers — the kind of
information that is ironically valuable both to literary critics and to corporations like
Amazon.

267

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

Figure 14: This heatmap represents the probability that Goodreads reviews for a given book would contain one
of the 30 topics on the left. It can also be explored as an interactive data visualization. Darker tiles indicate a
higher probability of containing the topic. Scanning left-to-right for the “School” topic, for example, reveals
that To Kill a Mocking Bird, The Great Gatsby, and The Catcher in the Rye have the darkest tiles in this row,
which indicates that reviews of these books are most likely to discuss school-related subjects. Scanning top-tobottom for Pride and Prejudice, to take another example, reveals darker tiles for the topics “Audiobooks &
Adaptations,” “Marriage,” “Re-Readable,” and “Gushing & Loving Language.” The heatmap rows have been
normalized to highlight differences between the books. We check the significance of these results via 95%
bootstrapped confidence intervals, and the majority of visible differences are significant.

268

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 15: This figure shows whether Goodreads users were more likely to rate books positively (4-5 stars) or
negatively (1-3 stars) when their reviews were likely to contain a certain topic. When Goodreads users published
reviews that were likely to contain the “Unlikeable Characters” topic, for example, they tended to rate the text in
question negatively. Perhaps counterintuitively, when Goodreads users published reviews likely to contain the
“Enjoyable & Interesting” topic, they were also more likely to rate the text negatively, because reviewers often
discussed not enjoying a book and not finding it interesting. These results are based on the full set of Goodreads
reviews — all books in all three sort orderings. The error bars indicate the standard deviation across 20
bootstrapped samples of the books, providing a measure of instability when a particular book is included or
excluded in the dataset.
269

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

The Classics Industry
The rest of this essay focuses on the category that we have labeled “The Classics
Industry,” the set of topics that help point to some of the institutions and phenomena
most responsible for reinforcing the classics in the twenty-first century. This
formulation is partly inspired by Murray’s sociological account of the “adaptation
industry,” in which she maps “the industrial structures, interdependent networks of
agents, commercial contexts, and legal and policy regimes within which adaptations
come to be,” mostly focusing on book-to-screen adaptations. 43 Though Goodreads
users often allude to the academy and professional literary critics in their reviews,
the prevalence of the term “classic” itself points to the shaping influence of forces
beyond the academy. To put this prevalence in concrete numbers, more than 15,000
Goodreads reviews explicitly mentioned the words “classic” or “classics,” while just
under 400 reviews mentioned the words “canon” or “canonical.” This simple metric
reveals a clear fault line in literary critical discourse between scholars and readers.
It also indexes the power of the classics as a marketing brand. We detail how this
brand functions in the sections below, and we also call attention to the ways that
Amazon specifically influences and profits from this branding.

Figure 16: This figure displays the number of Goodreads reviews that explicitly mentioned “classic” or
“classics” vs. “canon” or “canonical.”

The Classics Industry: School
Though Goodreads users rarely discuss the canon and scholars today rarely discuss
the classics, the academy remains an important engine for the classics industry. The
topic that we have labeled “School, ”which includes words like “school,” “high,”
“time,” “class,” “first,” “remember,” “years,” and “english,” identifies the clear
influence of school systems on Goodreads users’ conceptions of the classics,
aligning with theories of cultural production and canon formation proposed by
270

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

scholars like John Guillory and Pierre Bourdieu.44 The Goodreads reviews that rank
highly for this topic reveal a few key patterns. While some Goodreads users talk
about recent experiences in English literature classes, many more discuss literature
classroom experiences from the past or refer to more generalized conceptions of
“required reading.” “This was the first Toni Morrison I read for 10th grade English
while I was in high school,” one Goodreads user reflected about Morrison’s The
Bluest Eye (1970), which she shelved under classics. “I couldn’t get into [it] at the
time - and I think a good chunk of that had to do with how the story and it[s] difficult
subjects were handled in a classroom setting. Now that I can say I’ve read it again
for Book Riot’s 2018 Read Harder Challenge (an assigned book you hated or never
finished), I could definitely appreciate it more.”45 When users catalogue their reading
histories, high school and college reading often figures as an essential part of a fully
comprehensive account. Classics consumed from one’s school days serve as
something like a starter pack for a Goodreads catalogue, providing an easy way to
rate and review a number of books immediately. Even Goodreads users who have
wildly disparate genre inclinations will likely share these schoolbooks in common if
they share common backgrounds. Because of these common shared experiences,
schoolbooks foster social interactions between users, and communities commonly
form around and through them — whether to read a classic for the first time or to
reread a previously hated classic á la Book Riot’s Read Harder Challenge. Popular
conceptions of school syllabi and required reading shape readers’ habits long after
their school days, and readers even self-assign books in order to belatedly join these
communities. “Somehow I was never assigned to read this in high school, so I’m
reading it now!” Goodreads user Edward Rathke exclaimed about The Grapes of
Wrath.46 “I had been planning to read ‘1984’ for a long time,” explained another
Goodreads user named Andrew. “It’s one of those books that you are supposed to
read in high school. My high school AP Lit teacher had us read Aldous Huxley’s
‘Brave New World’ instead.”47 These reviews may also explain why the Goodreads
classics are less racially diverse than contemporary literary syllabi, since readers are
clearly influenced by historical and imagined literary curricula more than
contemporary literary curricula.

The Classics Industry: Publishing
School syllabi feed the classics industry. They are undoubtedly one of the reasons,
if not the primary reason, that the classics are a prominent advertising target value
on Goodreads. But they also feed another major node in the classics industry: the
271

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

publishing industry. High school and college syllabi, as Rebecca Rego Barry writes,
“are profitable to the classics publisher because they have a known market. These
titles are thus doubly promoted for entrance to the canon, in classrooms and
bookstores, and it is interesting to note that professors and publishers are symbiotic
in this respect.”48 The topic that we labeled “Editions & Translations,” which
includes words like “translation,” “edition,” “original,” and “version,” picks up on
discussions about which edition or version of a particular classic Goodreads users
have read, purchased, or borrowed. These are the Penguin Classics, the Signet
Classics, and the Modern Library Classics, which make up a significant part of the
literary market. “The classics market is huge,” The Guardian reported in 2016.
“There’s been a noticeable upswing in the number of publishers doing the
classics.”49 Though comprehensive book sales data is hard to come by, according to
Publishers Weekly and NPD BookScan, the “classics” sold almost 3.6 million units
in the first half of 2018 — making it the fifth-best selling literary category behind
“General Fiction,” “Suspense/Thrillers,” “Romance,” and “Mystery/Detective,” and
ahead of genre fiction heavyweights like “Fantasy” and “Science Fiction.”50 Even
Amazon has now developed its own line of classics: AmazonClassics. In fact, almost
every Goodreads classic currently in the public domain now has an AmazonClassics
Kindle e-book for sale. As the series title AmazonClassics confirms, the publishing
industry is one of the major forces that contributes to the gulf between “classic” and
“canon” in readers’ critical vocabularies.51

The Classics Industry: Adaptation & Audiobooks
Various classics editions from disparate publishers reestablish the classics in
concert. They are solidified, as Barry puts it, not through any one edition but
“through the continuous promotion of a given title in more than one imprint, certified
by more than one set of arbiters over a longer period of time.”52 This “continuous
promotion” is not limited to print publishing. The proliferation of literary texts into
other mediums further reinscribes certain books as classics, as Sarah Caldwell argues
and as our analysis confirms.53 The topic that we have labeled “Audiobooks &
Adaptations,” which includes words like “movie,” “audio,” “version,” “seen,” and
“listened,” captures how Goodreads users’ sense of the classics is shaped by
adaptations. The cluster of classics that rank highest for this topic — Truman
Capote’s Breakfast at Tiffany’s, L. Frank Baum’s The Wonderful Wizard of Oz,
Charles Dickens’s A Christmas Carol, and Stephen King’s The Shining — all have
major decades-old Hollywood film adaptations. But many of the high-ranking
272

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Goodreads reviews in this topic also discuss audiobooks, which share a surprisingly
strong relationship with film and television adaptations and with Amazon. Audible,
the world’s largest producer of audiobooks, is yet another subsidiary of Amazon. In
the last 10 years, Audible has invested in a series of classic literature audiobooks,
“Audible Signature Classics,” narrated by famous film and television actors. Most
of these classics are the same popular Goodreads classics that we have already
identified, paired with a performance by a high profile celebrity: The Great Gatsby
narrated by Jake Gyllenhaal (2013), Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland narrated by
Scarlett Johansson (2016), The Things They Carried narrated by Bryan Cranston
(2013), Anne of Green Gables narrated by Rachel McAdams (2016).54 This
catalogue represents what Cardwell refers to as “circular affirmation,” when a
certain selection of books are reinforced as classics by being adapted and confirmed
“across various areas of the public sphere” — confirmed, in this case, not only
through audiobook adaptation but also through association with Hollywood
celebrities.55 Based on our collection of Goodreads reviews, we find that this circle
of affirmation sometimes marginalizes the print text itself. For example, in one
review of Truman Capote’s Breakfast at Tiffany’s, a Goodreads user named Jennifer
Masterson shelved the novella under “classics” and gushed:
3 delicious hours of audio read by Mr. Michael C. Hall aka
Dexter!!! What a wonderful performance of Truman
Capote’s novella! I saw the movie years ago but I’ve never
read the book! I’m so happy to have listened to this edition
of the audio! 5+++++Stars for the narrator! 5 Stars for the
story! Highly highly recommended!!!56
This review of an Audible Original audiobook, narrated by a television star, Dexter’s
Michael C. Hall, was inspired by watching a Hollywood film. And though this
Hollywood film was originally based on a novella, Jennifer, this particular
Goodreads user, never read the novella and did not need to in order to review the
book on Goodreads and perpetuate the classics industry. This review also
demonstrates that Amazon-affiliated audiobooks inspire users to visit and rate books
on Goodreads, to bounce from one Amazon subsidiary to another. We speculate that
Amazon may also use Goodreads data to help determine which audiobooks,
television shows, and films to invest in. One of the earliest Amazon Studios
television series was an adaptation of Philip K. Dick’s The Man in the High Castle
(1962), a popular Goodreads classic, and one of Amazon Studios’ biggest
investments is a television series based on the Goodreads classics with the highest
273

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

average ratings in our dataset, J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings trilogy, the
rights for which Amazon purchased for $200 million.57 We are not claiming that
Goodreads reviews and ratings directly motivated this decision. But it is important
to recognize that Goodreads data is controlled by Amazon, a corporation that is
making some of the most expensive and high profile literary investments of our time.

The Classics Industry: Goodreads Users
The classics are clearly perpetuated by many powerful institutions as well as the
market economy. When Goodreads users shelve, rate, and review classics, they
contribute to this system and help sustain it. Making this point forcefully, Murray
argues:
The [Goodreads] website’s beguiling abundance of actual
reader responses to books has obscured for scholars the
limited extent to which users either understand or can
influence its algorithmic operations, leading to overblown
claims of readerly empowerment. Compelling evidence of
reading’s contemporary resilience and freely available
research archive though it may be, Goodreads is above all
else a node in platform capitalism.58
Goodreads is indeed “a node in platform capitalism,” but we believe it is important
to engage with how “beguiling” Goodreads reviews are and how empowering the
platform can feel for some Goodreads users. In Aarthi Vadde’s study of “amateur
creativity” on the internet, she argues that it is not possible to “make a blanket case
for or against the emancipatory potential of participatory culture on the Internet.” 59
Instead Vadde suggests thinking of the public sphere as “an always already
commercialized, industrialized, and pluralized space.”60 We believe this framing is
helpful for teasing out how Goodreads users sometimes explicitly resist Goodreads
and produce remarkably interesting amateur criticism all while being exploited by
Goodreads.
One of the most fitting metaphorical representations of this ironic tension manifests
when Goodreads users bash the classics, because, in doing so, they simultaneously
reject and reinforce books as classics in the same stroke. The topic that we have
labeled “Goodreads User Criticism,” which includes words like “stars,” “give,” and
274

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

“rating,” picks up on a common rhetorical trope — the justification of a user’s rating
for a given text — and it includes a significant amount of classics bashing. We find
that Goodreads reviews that rank highly for this topic are, overall, more likely to rate
a text negatively (fig. 15). Negative ratings seem to demand lengthy, reflexive
justifications in their accompanying reviews. For example, a Goodreads user named
Bren, mentioned in the introduction of this essay, shelved Nabokov’s Lolita as a
classic but rated the novel only three out of five stars. Though three stars was already
a low rating (particularly within the Goodreads community), she later returned to the
review and lowered the rating still further. In her updated review, Bren explained
that she originally gave Lolita a higher rating “in deference of its classic status.”61
But as she watched other Goodreads users openly panning books, including Lolita,
she gained new confidence to dissent from Lolita’s perceived reputation and from
its imagined community of fans, whom she dubbed “book snobs.” This retroactive
rating is a triumphant moment that Bren jokingly compares to winning an Academy
Award:
This review is inspired by some of my GR [Goodreads]
friends whose fearlessness about giving low stars to books
they do not like has inspired me to change my rating of
Lolita from three stars to two stars as that is what I really
feel . . . I get that this a classic and book snobs who read
this will sig[h] in indignation but I do not care. I just did
not get it and still don’t. I’d like to thank anti book snobs
everywhere for giving me the courage to rate Lolita two
stars. I will never forget you. Wow..is this what an Oscar
speech feels like?62
Many Goodreads users like Bren seem to feel liberated when they reject the classics
and express honest negative opinions about exalted books. When we reached out to
Bren to seek her permission to publish this review, she further elaborated about what
the Goodreads community means to her and even alluded to its special significance
during the COVID-19 pandemic: “There is something about speaking against a
Classic that can be very intimidating. People on here are fearless and, at least for me,
I never feel judged . . . When I first joined I was to[o] shy to talk to people but years
later, I have connected with wonderful people and it has become a wonderful source
of comfort to me, especially in trying times like these.”63 For Bren, the Goodreads
community is sincerely meaningful, and the ability to speak out against a classic is
genuinely empowering.
275

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

Another Goodreads user, Peter Derk, reflected about the joys of publishing “really
nasty review[s]” of the classics, but his joy, unlike Bren’s, was premised on the
perceived powerlessness of his Goodreads review in the face of a classic:
Every so often I’ll get into a classic. I guess because I feel like writing a really
nasty review. Classics are great fodder for nasty reviews because 1. The
people who made them are LONG dead . . . Saying bad stuff about a classic
novel doesn’t hurt the creator’s feelings . . . 2. Classics have such a pedestal
in the literary world already that the opinion of one lone weirdo . . . is pretty
irrelevant. It’s not like bashing on this book is suddenly going to render it a
Not A Classic or affect its sales. Frankly, I think that about everything I read,
but with classics, it’s a pretty rock solid premise.64
Rather than an emboldened community taking on Lolita’s classic reputation, as Bren
framed herself and her “GR friends,” Derk describes himself as “one lone weirdo”
who couldn’t possibly make a dent in a classic book’s reputation. Far from being
able to hurt a classic’s sales, as Derk acknowledges, his colorful, vehement 2000word takedown of The Phantom of the Opera likely only contributes to its
contemporary value by contributing to its continued discussion. This paradox is one
of the reasons that the classics remain so powerful. Love them or hate them, the
classics sustain themselves by staying in print, remaining a topic of conversation,
and enduring as a commodity.

Conclusion
So what is a “classic” in the twenty-first century? Based on our analysis of 144
Goodreads classics and 120,000 accompanying reviews, there are at least a few clear
answers. For Goodreads and Amazon, a classic is a prominent advertising target
value, a marketing tool, and a source of lucrative adaptation material. For Goodreads
users, a classic is a book read in high school, a book that inspired a TV show, or a
book that other Goodreads users have tagged as a classic. As we have shown, the
classics industry — the collaborative forces of publishing, film, television, Amazon,
and more — defines the status of popular classics to a large extent. Yet for
Goodreads users, a classic is also an invitation to become amateur critics and creative
writers, a chance to reflect on their lives and relationships to power, a conduit for
connecting to others, and an opportunity to enter a critical conversation that has long
excluded them. Literary history lives both profitably and vibrantly in the world under
276

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

the moniker of the classics. To recognize the significance of the term is to recognize
some of the places where literary criticism is most alive, relevant, and valuable.
Beyond the classics, this essay also points to major trends in contemporary literary
culture that pose data-related challenges for literary critics — trends such as the rise
of reader social networks, online amateur criticism, and Amazon. We believe that
computational methods like the ones used in this essay can play a significant role in
facing these challenges. When combined, computational methods and internet data
can help literary critics simultaneously capture the creative explosion of reader
responses as well as critique algorithmic culture.

Appendix
User Ethics
Like professional book reviewers, many Goodreads users take pride in their reviews
and craft them carefully. If we think of Goodreads reviewers as creative artists or
amateur critics, as the authors themselves do, then anonymizing their reviews
(removing their names and/or paraphrasing the review text) would deprive them of
proper creative credit.65 However, prior work has shown that even when internet
users post on public platforms, they have an expectation of privacy.66 For these
reasons, we have chosen not to publicly share our dataset, though we have shared
the code that we used to collect data from the Goodreads website:
https://github.com/maria-antoniak/goodreads-scraper. For Goodreads reviews
directly quoted in this essay, we have obtained explicit permission from each
reviewer. We messaged each of these selected reviewers on Goodreads, disclosed
our affiliations and the project goals and structure, and asked for consent to publish
parts of their review in this article. We offered users the option of being quoted in
this essay and attributed by their Goodreads username or the option of being quoted
in this essay but remaining anonymous. The Goodreads users who chose to be quoted
but remain anonymous are simply referred to as “Goodreads user” throughout the
essay.
The Goodreads Classics
This table includes the 144 Goodreads “classics” examined in this essay as well as
Goodreads reception statistics from 2019. You can also explore a searchable,
sortable version of this table with up-to-date Goodreads statistics.
277

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

Author

Title

Year

# Ratings

# Reviews

Classics Category

Homer

The Illiad

798k

11k

Most Shelved

Homer

The Odyssey

321k

6k

Most Shelved

Unknown

Beowulf

~750
BC
~700
BC
975

211k

6k

Geoffrey
Chaucer
Niccolò
Machiavelli
William
Shakespeare
William
Shakespeare
William
Shakespeare
William
Shakespeare
William
Shakespeare
Miguel de
Cervantes
Saavedra
William
Shakespeare
Daniel Defoe
Jonathan
Swift
Voltaire

The Canterbury
Tales
The Prince

1390

176k

3k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

1513

228k

7k

Most Read

Romeo and Juliet

1595

2M

18k

A Midsummer
Night’s Dream
Much Ado About
Nothing
Hamlet

1595

412k

7k

1598

202k

3k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

1603

662k

11k

Othello

1603

288k

6k

Don Quixote

1605

187k

7k

Macbeth

1606

610k

10k

Robinson Crusoe
Gulliver’s Travels

1719
1726

228k
214k

6k
5k

Candide

1759

202k

7k

Sense and
Sensibility
Pride and
Prejudice
Mansfield Park
Emma

1811

880k

14k

1813

3M

58k

1814
1815

263k
578k

9k
15k

Mary
Wollstonecra
ft Shelley
Jane Austen

Frankenstein

1818

1M

27k

Persuasion

1818

477k

16k

Jane Austen

Northanger Abbey

1818

274k

11k

Victor Hugo

The Hunchback of
Notre-Dame
Oliver Twist

1831

157k

4k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

1838

292k

7k

Most Shelved

A Christmas Carol

1843

538k

15k

Most Shelved

Jane Austen
Jane Austen
Jane Austen
Jane Austen

Charles
Dickens
Charles

278

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved
Most Shelved
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Dickens
Alexandre
Dumas
Alexandre
Dumas
Frederick
Douglass
Charlotte
Brontë
Emily Brontë
Charles
Dickens
Nathaniel
Hawthorne
Herman
Melville
Harriet
Beecher
Stowe
Gustave
Flaubert
Charles
Dickens
Charles
Dickens
Victor Hugo
Jules Verne
Lewis
Carroll
Fyodor
Dostoevsky
Leo Tolstoy
Louisa May
Alcott
Lewis
Carroll

Jules Verne
Mark Twain
Leo Tolstoy
Fyodor
Dostoevsky
Robert Louis
Stevenson

The Count of
Monte Cristo
The Three
Musketeers
Narrative of the
Life of Frederick
Douglass
Jane Eyre

1844

690k

19k

Most Shelved

1844

275k

7k

Most Shelved

1845

83k

4k

Most Read

1847

1M

37k

Wuthering Heights

1847

1M

32k

David Copperfield

1849

186k

6k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

The Scarlet Letter

1850

647k

14k

Moby-Dick, or, the
Whale
Uncle Tom’s
Cabin

1851

449k

14k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

1852

182k

7k

Most Shelved

Madame Bovary

1856

225k

9k

Most Shelved

A Tale of Two
Cities
Great Expectations

1859

755k

16k

1861

596k

15k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

Les Misérables
Journey to the
Center of the Earth
Alice’s Adventures
in Wonderland
Crime and
Punishment
War and Peace
Little Women

1862
1864

622k
134k

15k
5k

Most Shelved
Most Read

1865

186k

8k

Most Read

1866

550k

16k

1867
1869

241k
1M

10k
20k

Alice’s Adventures
in Wonderland &
Through the
Looking-Glass
Around the World
in Eighty Days
The Adventures of
Tom Sawyer
Anna Karenina

1871

427k

10k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

1873

167k

6k

Most Read

1875

693k

9k

Most Shelved

1877

593k

21k

The Brothers
Karamazov
Treasure Island

1879

217k

10k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

1882

363k

10k

279

Most Shelved and Most
Read

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

Mark Twain
Robert Louis
Stevenson
Leo Tolstoy
Arthur
Conan Doyle
Oscar Wilde
Frances
Hodgson
Burnett
Thomas
Hardy
Charlotte
Perkins
Gilman
H.G. Wells
Oscar Wilde
Bram Stoker
Henry James
H.G. Wells
Joseph
Conrad
L. Frank
Baum
James Allen
Jack London
J.M. Barrie
L.M.
Montgomery
Frances
Hodgson
Burnett
Gaston
Leroux
Franz Kafka
Agatha
Christie
Hermann
Hesse

The Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn
The Strange Case
of Dr. Jekyll and
Mr. Hyde
The Death of Ivan
Ilych
A Study in Scarlet

1884

1M

14k

Most Shelved

1886

330k

11k

Most Shelved and Most
Read

1886

75k

4k

Most Read

1887

281k

9k

Most Read

The Picture of
Dorian Gray
A Little Princess

1890

840k

25k

Most Shelved

1890

256k

6k

Most Shelved

Tess of the
D’Urbervilles
The Yellow WallPaper

1891

222k

8k

Most Shelved

1892

71k

3k

Most Read

The Time Machine

1895

368k

10k

The Importance of
Being Earnest
Dracula

1895

280k

8k

1897

832k

22k

The Turn of the
Screw
The War of the
Worlds
Heart of Darkness

1898

83k

6k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read

1898

218k

7k

Most Read

1899

373k

12k

The Wonderful
Wizard of Oz
As a Man Thinketh
The Call of the
Wild
Peter Pan

1900

330k

11k

1902
1903

50k
296k

3k
9k

1904

239k

9k

Anne of Green
Gables
The Secret Garden

1908

645k

19k

1910

807k

16k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read

The Phantom of
the Opera
The
Metamorphosis
The Mysterious
Affair at Styles
Siddhartha

1910

184k

6k

Most Shelved

1915

541k

14k

1920

211k

6k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read

1922

513k

15k

280

Most Shelved and Most
Read

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Agatha
Christie
Kahlil
Gibran
Virginia
Woolf
F. Scott
Fitzgerald
Ernest
Hemingway
Virginia
Woolf
Ernest
Hemingway
Aldous
Huxley
Agatha
Christie
Margaret
Mitchell
John
Steinbeck
J.R.R.
Tolkien
Agatha
Christie
Zora Neale
Hurston
Daphne du
Maurier
Kathrine
Kressmann
Taylor
Agatha
Christie
John
Steinbeck
Albert
Camus
Stefan Zweig
Antoine de
SaintExupéry
Betty Smith
George
Orwell
John
Steinbeck
Anne Frank

The Murder on the
Links
The Prophet

1923

36k

2k

Most Read

1923

207k

8k

Most Read

Mrs. Dalloway

1925

199k

8k

The Great Gatsby

1926

3M

61k

The Sun Also
Rises
A Room of One’s
Own
A Farewell to
Arms
Brave New World

1926

344k

12k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

1929

97k

6k

Most Read

1929

244k

9k

Most Shelved

1932

1M

26k

Murder on the
Orient Express
Gone with the
Wind
Of Mice and Men

1934

310k

20k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read

1936

1M

18k

Most Shelved

1937

2M

31k

The Hobbit or
There and Back
Again
Death on the Nile

1937

3M

43k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read

1937

100k

4k

Most Read

Their Eyes Were
Watching God
Rebecca

1937

235k

12k

Most Read

1938

398k

20k

Address Unknown

1938

6k

833

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read

And Then There
Were None
The Grapes of
Wrath
The Stranger

1939

667k

26k

Most Read

1939

677k

15k

1942

610k

20k

Chess Story
The Little Prince

1942
1943

53k
1M

4k
33k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read

A Tree Grows in
Brooklyn
Animal Farm

1943

360k

19k

Most Shelved

1945

2M

47k

The Pearl

1945

173k

8k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read

The Diary of a

1947

2M

26k

Most Shelved and Most

281

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

George
Orwell
C.S. Lewis

J.D. Salinger
C.S. Lewis
Ernest
Hemingway
E.B. White
John
Steinbeck
Ray
Bradbury
Arthur Miller
J.R.R.
Tolkien
C.S. Lewis
Richard
Matheson
William
Golding
J.R.R.
Tolkien
C.S. Lewis
J.R.R.
Tolkien
Vladimir
Nabokov
Truman
Capote
Chinua
Achebe
Harper Lee
Joseph
Heller
Philip K.
Dick
Ken Kesey
Anthony
Burgess
Sylvia Plath
Frank
Herbert

Young Girl
1984

Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read

1949

3M

60k

The Lion, the
Witch and the
Wardrobe
The Catcher in the
Rye
Prince Caspian
The Old Man and
the Sea
Charlotte’s Web

1950

2M

19k

1951

2M

52k

1951
1952

315k
726k

6k
22k

1952

1M

16k

East of Eden

1952

391k

17k

Fahrenheit 451

1953

1M

42k

The Crucible
The Fellowship of
the Ring
The Horse and His
Boy
I Am Legend

1953
1954

296k
2M

7k
19k

1954

245k

6k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read

1954

81k

5k

Most Read

Lord of the Flies

1954

2M

33k

Most Shelved

The Two Towers

1954

637k

9k

Most Shelved

The Magician’s
Nephew
The Return of the
King
Lolita

1955

364k

11k

Most Read

1955

604k

8k

1955

603k

22k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

Breakfast at
Tiffany’s
Things Fall Apart

1958

196k

9k

Most Read

1959

258k

12k

Most Read

To Kill a
Mockingbird
Catch-22

1960

4M

84k

Most Shelved

1961

675k

17k

Most Shelved

The Man in the
High Castle
One Flew Over the
Cuckoo’s Nest
A Clockwork
Orange
The Bell Jar
Dune

1962

149k

10k

Most Read

1962

584k

10k

Most Shelved

1962

546k

12k

Most Shelved

1963
1965

531k
636k

20k
17k

Most Shelved
Most Read

282

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Truman
Capote
Daniel Keyes
S.E. Hinton
Gabriel
García
Márquez
Philip K.
Dick
Kurt
Vonnegut
Ursula K. Le
Guin
Toni
Morrison
Richard
Bach
Stephen
King
Alice Walker
Margaret
Atwood
Gary Paulsen
Paulo Coelho
Roald Dahl
Laura
Esquivel
Tim O’Brien
Lois Lowry
Mitch Albom
Mitch Albom

In Cold Blood

1965

476k

15k

Most Read

Flowers for
Algernon
The Outsiders

1966

428k

16k

Most Read

1967

827k

30k

One Hundred
Years of Solitude

1967

678k

27k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved

Do Androids
Dream of Electric
Sheep?
SlaughterhouseFive
The Left Hand of
Darkness
The Bluest Eye

1968

303k

12k

Most Read

1969

1M

24k

1969

102k

8k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read

1970

142k

7k

Most Read

Jonathan
Livingston Seagull
The Shining

1970

181k

7k

Most Read

1977

991k

20k

Most Read

The Color Purple

1982

468k

13k

The Handmaid’s
Tale
Hatchet
The Alchemist
Matilda
Like Water for
Chocolate
The Things They
Carried
The Giver
Tuesdays with
Morrie
The Five People
You Meet in
Heaven

1985

1M

60k

1986
1988
1988
1989

273k
2M
538k
310k

13k
70k
14k
8k

Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Shelved and Most
Read
Most Read
Most Read
Most Read
Most Read

1990

231k

13k

Most Read

1993
1997

2M
702k

62k
23k

Most Shelved
Most Read

2003

535k

19k

Most Read

283

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

References
1 T. S. Eliot, What Is a Classic?: An Address Delivered Before the Virgil Society on the 16th of October, 1944
(London: Faber & Faber, 1945).
2 “Classic, Adj. And N.” in OED Online (Oxford University Press), accessed May 19, 2020.
3 John Guillory, “Canon, Syllabus, List: A Note on the Pedagogic Imaginary,” Transition no. 52 (1991): 36–54. See
also Guillory, Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2013), 6.
4 Ibid.
5 Bren, “Bren’s Review of Lolita,” Goodreads, April 11, 2018.
6 Richard D. Altick, “From Aldine to Everyman: Cheap Reprint Series of the English Classics 1830-1906,” Studies
in Bibliography 11 (1958): 23.
7 Ankhi Mukherjee, What Is a Classic?: Postcolonial Rewriting and Invention of the Canon (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 2013), 9.
8 Quoted in Robert Giroux, “Introduction,” in Thomas Merton, The Seven Storey Mountain (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 1998), xviii.
9 Simone Murray, The Adaptation Industry: The Cultural Economy of Contemporary Literary Adaptation, (New
York: Routledge, 2013); Pierre Bourdieu, The Field of Cultural Production, ed. Randal Johnson, (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1993).
10 See Mel Stanfill, Exploiting Fandom: How the Media Industry Seeks to Manipulate Fans, (Iowa City: University
Of Iowa Press, 2019); José van Dijck, The Culture of Connectivity: A Critical History of Social Media, (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2013); Jodi Dean, “Why the Net Is Not a Public Sphere,” Constellations 10, no. 1 (2003):
95–112.
11 Aarthi Vadde, “Amateur Creativity: Contemporary Literature and the Digital Publishing Scene,” New Literary
History 48, no. 1 (2017): 27–51; Simone Murray, “Secret Agents: Algorithmic Culture, Goodreads and Datafication
of the Contemporary Book World,” European Journal of Cultural Studies, December 5, 2019; Lisa Nakamura,
“‘Words with Friends’: Socially Networked Reading on Goodreads,” PMLA 128, no. 1 (January 1, 2013): 238–43;
Mark McGurl, “Everything and Less: Fiction in the Age of Amazon,” Modern Language Quarterly 77, no. 3
(September 1, 2016): 447–71.
12 Karen Bourrier and Mike Thelwall, “The Social Lives of Books: Reading Victorian Literature on Goodreads,”
Journal of Cultural Analytics (February 20, 2020): 1-34; J. D. Porter, “Popularity/Prestige,” Stanford Literary Lab
Pamphlet 17 (2018); Alexander Manshel, Laura McGrath, and J.D. Porter, “Who Cares about Literary Prizes?,”
Public Books, September 3, 2019,; James F. English, Scott Enderle, and Rahul Dhakecha, “Mining Goodreads:
Literary Reception Studies at Scale,” accessed March 5, 2019; Allison Hegel, “Social Reading in the Digital Age”
(Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles, 2018); Andrew Piper and Richard Jean So, “Study Shows
Books Can Bring Republicans and Democrats Together,” The Guardian, October 12, 2016.

284

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

13 Murray, “Secret Agents,” 7.
14 Maria Antoniak and Melanie Walsh, Goodreads Scraper, Python, 2020.
15 Vadde, “Amateur Creativity”; Melanie Micir and Aarthi Vadde, “Obliterature: Toward an Amateur Criticism,”
Modernism/Modernity 25, no. 3 (2018): 517–49; Saikat Majumdar and Aarthi Vadde, eds., The Critic as Amateur
(New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2019).
16 Vadde, “Amateur Creativity,” 27.
17 Thomas Vander Wal, “Folksonomy,” February 2, 2007; Arkaitz Zubiaga, Christian Körner, and Markus
Strohmaier, “Tags Vs Shelves: From Social Tagging to Social Classification,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia - HT ’11 (the 22nd ACM conference, Eindhoven, The Netherlands: ACM
Press, 2011), 93; Shilad Sen et al., “Tagging, Communities, Vocabulary, Evolution,” in Proceedings of the 2006
20th Anniversary Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW ’06 (Banff, Alberta, Canada:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2006), 181–90.
18 Allison Hegel writes illuminatingly about the evolution of genre on Goodreads in her dissertation, “Social
Reading in the Digital Age.”
19 Candace, “Candace’s Review of The Handmaid’s Tale,” Goodreads, April 17, 2017.
20 Hegel, “Social Reading,” 36.
21 Jeremy Rosen, “Literary Fiction and the Genres of Genre Fiction,” Post45, August 9, 2018, our emphasis.
22 “How It Works,” Goodreads, February 4, 2007.
23 “How It Works,” Goodreads, July 24, 2017.
24 “About Goodreads,” Goodreads, May 2020.
25 Nakamura, “‘Words with Friends’,” 241.
26 Alexis C. Madrigal, “How Netflix Reverse-Engineered Hollywood,” The Atlantic, January 2, 2014.
27 Ibid.
28 According to Lisa Nakamura, Goodreads users may in fact be the ones paying: “We pay with our attention and
our readerly capital, our LOLs, rankings, conversations, and insights into narrative, character, and literary tradition.”
Nakamura, “‘Words with Friends,’” 241.
29 See Porter, “Popularity/Prestige” for other uses of Goodreads reception data. See Mark Algee-Hewitt and Mark
McGurl, “Between Canon and Corpus: Six Perspectives on 20th-Century Novels,” January 1, 2015 for other readerproduced definitions of the canon.
30 Nakamura, “‘Words with Friends,’” 240.
31 “Audience Insights - Goodreads,” Quantcast, accessed May 27, 2020.
32 We compiled data on AP English recommended authors from The Princeton Review’s Cracking the AP English
Literature & Composition Exam, 2020 Edition: Practice Tests & Prep for the NEW 2020 Exam (New York: The
Princeton Review, 2019). We compiled data on college syllabi by scraping The Open Syllabus Project’s top texts
and authors for English Literature.
285

THE GOODREADS “CLASSICS”

33 We use a slightly expanded version of the racial categories presented in the U.S. census: White, Black or African
American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, Latinx, and Middle
Eastern or North African (MENA). While the U.S. census currently treats Hispanic/Latino/Spanish origin as a
question of ethnicity and not race, and it currently considers the MENA population as white, we include them as
separate racial categories based on advocacy from groups such as the Arab American Institute and research from the
U.S. Census Bureau that suggests that incorporating Latinx and MENA might lead to more reflective racial
representation. We recognize, however, that racial categories from the U.S. census, even in an expanded form, are
flawed and subject to criticism. For more on Latinx and MENA as expanded racial categories, as well as the flaws
and history of racial categories in the U.S. census, see Hephzibah V. Strmic-Pawl, Brandon A. Jackson, and Steve
Garner, “Race Counts: Racial and Ethnic Data on the U.S. Census and the Implications for Tracking Inequality,”
Sociology of Race and Ethnicity 4, no. 1 (2018): 1–13. See also The United States Census Bureau, “About Race”;
“2015 National Content Test: Race and Ethnicity Analysis Report.”
34 “Audience Insights - Goodreads.”
35 Quantcast, “Understanding Digital Audience Measurement,” February 2, 2019, 15-16; Ruha Benjamin, Race
After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim Code, (Medford: Polity, 2019), 91.
36 In promotional materials for advertisers, such as the “Book Discovery Information Kit” sent to potential
advertisers upon request, Goodreads draws on Quantcast data to offer demographic percentages related to users’
gender, age, income, and education.
37 In constructing the Stanford Lit Lab’s Twentieth-20th-Century Corpus, Algee-Hewitt and McGurl similarly
found that best-of lists voted on by readers included more genre fiction than their elite counterparts — a finding
corroborated by Porter in his work on Goodreads as well. Algee-Hewitt and McGurl, “Between Canon and Corpus,”
6; Porter, “Popularity/Prestige.”
38 Jane Tompkins, “Masterpiece Theater: The Politics of Hawthorne’s Literary Reputation,” American Quarterly
36, no. 5 (1984): 618.
39 Antoniak and Walsh, Goodreads Scraper.
40 Andrew Kachites McCallum, “Mallet: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit,” 2002; David M. Blei,
Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan, “Latent Dirichlet Allocation,” Journal of Machine Learning Research 3
(January 2003): 993–1022.
41 Laure Thompson and David Mimno, “Authorless Topic Models: Biasing Models Away from Known Structure,”
in Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 2018, Santa Fe:
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018), 3903–14.
42 Murray, “Secret Agents,” 7.
43 Murray, The Adaption Industry, 6.
44 As John Guillory writes, “It is only by understanding the social function and institutional protocols of the school
that we will understand how works are preserved, reproduced, and disseminated over successive generations and
centuries,” Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation (University of Chicago Press, 2013), vii.
45 Goodreads User, “Goodreads Review of The Bluest Eye,” Goodreads, August 26, 2012.
46 Edward Rathke, “Edward Rathke’s Review of The Grapes of Wrath,” Goodreads, December 13, 2018.
47 Andrew, “Andrew’s Review of 1984,” Goodreads, May 2, 2007.

286

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

48 Rebecca Rego Barry, “The Neo-Classics: (Re)Publishing the ‘Great Books’ in the United States in the 1990s,”
Book History 6, no. 1 (2003): 264.
49 John Walsh, “Old Book, New Look: Why the Classics Are Flying Off the Shelves,” The Guardian, September
17, 2016, sec. Books.
50 “Cooking and Sci-Fi Are the Hot Print Segments This Year so Far,” PublishersWeekly.com, accessed June 7,
2020.
51 Rebecca Barry reports that the “avoidance of that incendiary word” — canon — “has become a theme, especially
in modern classics publishing,” in “The Neo-Classics,” 259.
52 Ibid., 262.
53 Sarah Cardwell, Adaptation Revisited: Television and the Classic Novel (Manchester: Manchester University
Press, 2002); Simone Murray observes a similar reinforcement of symbolic capital with book-to-screen adaptions,
though she purposely excludes “classic” film and television adaptations from her study because “the much longer
cultural histories of such texts cause them to enter the contemporary economy already freighted with approbation
and/or notoriety,” The Adaptation Industry, 21.
54 For more Audible classics narrated by celebrities, see https://www.audible.com/ep/BucketListListens.
55 Sarah Cardwell, Adaptation Revisited: Television and the Classic Novel (Manchester: Manchester University
Press, 2002), 2.
56 Jennifer Masterson, “Jennifer Masterson’s Review of Breakfast at Tiffany’s,” July 8, 2016.
57 As of September 2019, J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Return of the King (1955) and The Two Towers (1954) had the two
highest average Goodreads ratings in the dataset with scores of 4.52/5 and 4.44/5 stars, respectively. The Fellowship
of the Ring (1954) takes fourth place with a score of 4.35/5 stars. Nellie Andreeva, “Amazon Sets ‘the Lord of the
Rings’ TV Series in Mega Deal with Multi-Season Commitment,” Deadline (blog), November 13, 2017.
58 Murray, “Secret Agents,” 3.
59 Vadde, “Amateur Creativity,” 28.
60 Ibid., 29.
61 Bren, “Bren’s Review of Lolita,” Goodreads, April 11, 2018.
62 Ibid.
63 Melanie Walsh and Bren, “Goodreads Direct Message,” May 9, 2020.
64 Peter Derk, “Peter Derk’s Review of The Phantom of the Opera,” accessed October 28, 2019.
65 Amy Bruckman, “Studying the Amateur Artist: A Perspective on Disguising Data Collected in Human Subjects
Research on the Internet,” Ethics and Information Technology 4, no. 3 (September 1, 2002): 217–31.
66 Casey Fiesler Proferes Nicholas, “‘Participant’ Perceptions of Twitter Research Ethics,” Social Media + Society,
March 10, 2018.

287

