Journal of
Cultural Analytics

April 20, 2021

Voice
Nika Mavrody, Laura B. McGrath, Nichole Nomura, Alexander Sherman
Nika Mavrody, Stanford University
Laura B. McGrath, Temple University
Nichole Nomura, Stanford University
Alexander Sherman, Stanford University
Peer-Reviewer: Sarah Wasserman
Data Repository: 10.7910/DVN/1NTRIF

ABSTRACT
The concept of the writer’s voice is central to the way that contemporary literature is read, evaluated,
circulated, and criticized, appearing everywhere from the creative writing classroom to online reader
reviews. Yet, voice remains a slippery and tendentious concept: Is voice something a writer has, or is it
something a writer is? Does everyone have a voice? Are some voices voicier, and how? What form does
voice take on the page? How is voice different from style or constrained by genre? In this essay, we track
voice’s many meanings across a large corpus of what we call “vernacular literary criticism.” First, we
consider the ways that voice is used in different communities and the writers it is used to describe. Second,
we develop a conceptual model of voice's many uses, based on our reading of a (limited) version of our
composite corpus. Finally, we build a word-embedding model to track voice's use in a larger discourse.
Ultimately, we show that voice, style, and genre operate in a unified vernacular critical system, that voice
(along with genre) is a subcategory of style, and that voice consists of the parts of style not otherwise
captured by genre.

If trade publications like Publisher’s Weekly and Writer’s Digest are any indication,
there is no more desirable a trait for a would-be writer than voice.1 Not talent or
technique, not craft or style, not a meticulously plotted story or glittering prose:
voice. Agents want to represent writers who have it: “I tend to be seduced by voice,
so voice-driven fiction and nonfiction are high on my wish list.”2 Editors champion
it: “If a new voice speaks to you, persist in your crusade on behalf of that writer.” 3
Critics are likewise spoken to and seduced by voice. The New York Times alone
christened “the voice of a generation” 96 times in just as many years. Literary
organizations, such as PEN America, celebrate voice when recognizing “emerging
writers whose voices are adding to the literary experience,” or hosting public
programs designed to “amplify . . . emerging and marginalized voices.”4 And voice
sells. The hashtag #OwnVoices is used to designate books written by and about
members of historically marginalized communities.5 To sum up: voice is a quality
of writing — an aspect of style — but it is related to lived experience and identity.
A writer is a voice, but only certain types of writers are voices — Voice of a
Generation, on one hand, Emerging Voices, on the other. And, despite (or perhaps
because of) the stubborn inconsistency and downright contradictory nature of the
Journal of Cultural Analytics 4 (2021): 218-242. doi: 10.22148/001c.22222

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

concept, voice is central to the way that contemporary literature is read, evaluated,
circulated, and criticized.
This should come as no surprise to scholars of contemporary literature. As Mark
McGurl has argued, the imperative to “find your voice” was both “a scholarlypedagogical and an artistic preoccupation” of the creative writing program of the
1960s and 70s, and it came to dominate “postwar fiction as a whole.”6 McGurl traces
the concept’s genesis to Wayne C. Booth’s rejection of New Critical impersonality,
in which voice emanates from a unifying Implied Author. Dorothy Hale summarizes
this new definition of voice as “authentic self-expression of identity that is integral
to and inevitable in any act of novelistic communication.” 7 Critics attached the term
primarily to writers associated with the Program Era’s “high cultural pluralism.” But
just as that category was capacious enough to include such differing writers as Philip
Roth, Flannery O’Connor, and Toni Morrison, so voice is a concept that adheres
diverseley, ubiquitously. Voice, in Hale’s understanding, exists in all writers and
obtains to all writing. But whatever was intended by the enjoinment to “find your
voice” in the Program, the concept has had an active extracurricular life.
The evolution of this concept outside of the creative writing classroom might well
attest to the significance of McGurl’s thesis: the Program has been so pervasive that
its practices and logics have become commonplace. The focus of this essay is not
the Program, but the extracurricular application of its vocabulary. Despite the
proliferation of accounts of literary institutions and the institutionalization of literary
studies, we know little about the ways that readers — Janice Radway’s “general
readers,” Laura Heffernan and Rachel Sagner Buurma’s “common readers,” Merve
Emre’s “bad readers” — have responded to these formations outside of of the
academy.8 Voice’s transformation shows us that whatever knowledge institutions
produce is both received as and recycled into something quite different. Literary
criticism has a very active life outside of the seminar and away from the purview of
peer review, replete with its own discourses and vocabularies. Such criticism
contains vital literary-sociological information that, as Emre notes, has the potential
to “generate new theories about reading and the social logics it reproduces.”9
Attention to readerly networks of production and meaning-making is just as crucial
for large-scale computational literary criticism as for literary sociology — and just
as rare.10 For both literary sociology and cultural analytics, the reader’s absence
poses a methodological and a critical problem.

219

VOICE

In this essay, we examine voice’s conceptual development and usage in vernacular
literary criticism.“Vernacular criticism” was coined by Bryan Droitcour in 2014 to
describe the work of amateur art critics who review museums, installations, and
exhibits on Yelp; Lisa Nakamura used the phrase independently, noting the
centrality of digital media platforms, such as Goodreads, in the proliferation of this
discourse. 11 These online forums,, Scott Selisker has argued, have hastened the
uptake of concepts such as the Bechdel Test — an analytical framework that is
significant to readers but generally not taken seriously by scholars. Though not
unrelated to Aarthi Vadde’s formulation of “amateur criticism,” vernacular criticism
does not hinge on the critic’s professional status. Vernacular critics may write in the
New York Times or Bustle.com or on Reddit or all of the above. (Indeed, well-known
authors maintain their own Goodreads accounts, regularly post reviews, and engage
with other Goodreaders; and as Selisker has noted, scholars with formal academic
training increasingly participate in vernacular critical networks.12) Instead, we adapt
the concept of vernacular literary criticism from Miriam Hansen’s influential
concept of “vernacular modernism,” used to describe the persistence of modernist
style in “mass-produced, mass consumed phenomena,” such as cinema, fashion, and
architecture.13 Like Hansen, we mean to emphasize discourse: the language that
surrounds these concepts — its use, transformation, connectivity. And following
Selisker, we examine vernacular literary criticism on its own terms, as — a
discourse concerned with its own modes of evaluation, replete with its own critical
idiom.
Voice, a slippery and tendentious concept, makes for a useful case study. In what
follows, we consider the uses of voice across vernacular literary criticism, toggling
between methods (counting, reading, modeling) and objects of study. Beginning
with a working definition of voice based on Hale’s, as an “integral,” “inevitable,”
and “authentic self-expression of identity” in a novel, we ultimately find that voice
provides readers a unitary framework for grappling with problems both textual and
paratextual . We begin by tracking voice’s many meanings across a large corpus,
considering high-level statistics about its usage in different communities and the
writers it is used to describe. Second, we develop a conceptual model of voice’s
many uses, based on our reading of a (limited) version of our composite corpus.
Finally, we build a word-embedding model to track voice’s use in a larger discourse.
Ultimately, we show that voice, style, and genre operate in a unified vernacular
critical system, that voice (along with genre) is a subcategory of style, and that voice
consists of the parts of style not otherwise captured by genre.
220

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

A Good Voice is (Not) Hard To Find
Voice: an “authentic self-expression of identity that is integral to and inevitable in
any act of novelistic communication.” We adopt this definition from Dorothy Hale
— seemingly the most agreeable, and not entirely inconsistent with many popular
usages of the term briefly sketched above. But Hale says nothing of form or style,
nothing to suggest voice can be read or perceived by Goodreads users or reviewers
in the Times. Voice is a type of “self-expression” that is present in “act[s] of
novelistic communication” — what form does it take? While Hale would likely
assert that everyone has a voice, PEN America and #OwnVoices use the term as an
imprecise nominalization for “underrepresented writers” or “minoritized writers.” Is
voice something a writer has, or is it something a writer is? Does everyone have a
voice? Are some voices voicier, and how?
These are not questions that individual examples, no matter how interesting, can
satisfactorily answer. Our century-spanning, composite corpus (see table 1) is
comprised of vernacular criticism produced by different communities (reviewers,
authors, and common readers), published in different forms (book reviews, literary
journalism, author interviews, Goodreads), and in response to different types of
literature (canonical, prizewinners, bestsellers).
Corpus

Review
Publication
Dates

Number Notes
of Texts

American
1900-2003
Periodicals Online
Review Corpus

1,698

Book reviews from U.S.
newspapers, magazines, and
literary journals; augmented
with newspaper data from the
Literary
Lab
newspaper
corpus.

The Paris Review 1953-2019
Author Interviews

318

Interviews with 311 authors,
translators, or publishers.

221

VOICE

Blurbs

2013-2018

26,139

Blurbs used in publishers’
seasonal catalogs, 2013-2018.
Blurbs for 748 books.

Goodreads
Reviews: Canon

2013-2019

77,913

User-generated reviews of the
250 texts compiled in Literary
Lab Pamphlet #8, “Between
Canon and Corpus” (AlgeeHewitt and McGurl).

Goodreads
Reviews:
Prizewinners

2013-2019

105,993

User-generated reviews of the
prizewinners and nominees
for the National Book Award
in Fiction, the National Book
Critics Circle Award in
Fiction, and Pulitzer Prize for
Fiction.

Goodreads
Reviews:
Bestsellers

2013-2019

116,293

Bestsellers
from
1953present,
according
to
Publisher’s Weekly.

Table 1. Composite corpus of Vernacular Criticism.

Professional Book Reviews: From the American Periodicals Online series
(ProQuest), we gathered book reviews from popular magazines (like Cosmopolitan)
and literary journals (like The Dial). To this, we added book reviews from the
Literary Lab’s historic newspapers corpus, which includes publications such as the
New York Times and the Los Angeles Times. We also gathered, by hand, New York
Times reviews of prizewinning and bestselling novels that were not available from
ProQuest (see below). Together, these corpora amount to 1,164 book reviews,
published between 1900 and 2003, by professional reviewers.
Author Interviews: The Paris Review is a well-known quarterly literary magazine
that has been publishing lengthy interviews with authors since its founding in 1953.
This corpus contains the full text of every interview published by the magazine —
318 interviews with 311 authors, translators, or publishers.14

222

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Blurbs: These blurbs were scraped from seasonal catalogs from the Big Five
publishers, used to advertise books published between 2013 and 2018. While many
of these blurbs have been printed in newspapers that may be in our APO corpus, we
believe that these excerpts are differently useful, indexing what publishers believe
is meaningful praise. This corpus is more recent than all of our others, with all books
under consideration published since 2013. While Goodreads reviews (below) were
also published recently, books under review can be much older.
Reader-Generated Book Reviews: Our largest collection is comprised of Goodreads
reviews. Goodreads is a valuable resource, but unwieldy due to its scale. We
developed three subsets of novels (nearly 1,500 books) and scraped the first 300
reviews for each: bestsellers, prizewinners, and canonical novels. Bestseller data was
gathered from Publisher’s Weekly. Prizewinners include books that won and were
shortlisted for the National Book Award, the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction, and the
National Book Critics Circle Award.15 Our list of canonical novels comes from the
Literary Lab’s twentieth-century corpus, which was generated from six lists (the
development of this corpus is detailed in Algee-Hewitt and McGurl, “Literary Lab
Pamphlet #8: Between Canon and Corpus”). 16
Corpus
American
Periodicals
Review Corpus

Number of Number Percentage
Reviews
Voicey
Voicey
Online 1,698

196

11%

The Paris Review Author Interviews 318

285

89.6%

Blurbs

26,139

955

3.6%

Goodreads Reviews: Canon

38,933

2,027

5.2%

Goodreads Reviews: Prizewinners

105,993

5,372

5%

Goodreads Reviews: Bestsellers

116,293

1,499

1.2%

Table 2. Some data about the use of "voice" in each corpus.

Across all of our corpora, one consistent trend emerged: voice is used primarily in
discussions of literary fiction, rather than genre fiction — prestigious fiction, rather
223

VOICE

than popular fiction.17 We’ll begin with the professionals (table 2). 11% of reviews
in the APO corpus mention voice at least once. However, the New York Times alone
accounts for 70% of those uses. Given the centrality of Times reviews in the larger
book review ecosystem, it is hardly surprising to see the term popularized here,
especially as only a small group of in-house reviewers are employed at the Times at
once. Even more shocking is the frequency with which voice appears in The Paris
Review: a staggering 89.6% of interviews mention “voice” at least once, and the
concept is invoked by 78% of authors interviewed.18 This result is perhaps
predictable: the writers profiled here are the closest to the MFA seminar, whether
graduates or employees.19
Though professional reviewers frequently discuss voice, their comments are
infrequently excerpted for advertisements. Our blurb corpus contained very few
mentions of voice: only 3.6% of blurbs for books published between 2013 and 2018
praise a writer’s voice in catalogs or on a cover. Voice is used most frequently for
more literary works (as opposed to genre fiction): 45% of the blurbs that mention
voice are for works classified by publishers as literary fiction, with the remaining
55% split between genres; no other genre receives as large a share of mentions. 20
This distinction likely carries over into book reviews, as well, in the form of a
selection bias for the types of books reviewed by major outlets. In other words,
critics at the NYT might invoke voice often because they are reviewing more literary
fiction than genre fiction. Literary fiction might be an “anti-genre genre,” as
Matthew Wilkens has described it, in which “it is difficult to find any broadly
agreeable set of . . . feature[s] by which literary fiction might be consistently
identified.”21 But the vernacular literary-critical discourse surrounding literary
fiction suggests that voice may be one of those features distinct to, or at least more
pronounced in, literary fiction.
This finding is consistent with our Goodreads corpus as well, though somewhat
complicated owing to the amateur status of reviewers and the variety of works
reviewed in our corpus. Reviewers on Goodreads do not use the term as often as
professional reviewers, nor are they as withholding as publishers. The Goodreads
reviews of both canonical novels and prizewinning novels invoke voice at a
comparable rate; it is mentioned at least once in approximately 5% of reviews. Yet
voice does not appear to be an especially commonly used phrase in the bestseller
corpus. Either Goodreads users comment on voice only when discussing a certain
type of prestigious novel — prizewinning and canonical novels — or, the type of
224

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Goodreads user who is likely to read and review a canonical or prizewinning novel
is also likely to discuss voice. Or this may simply be an instance of feedback: voice
is included in blurbs for literary fiction and discussed by reviewers (many of whom
are active on Goodreads), and so common readers are primed to read for and discuss
voice.
As #OwnVoices makes clear, voice is often shorthand for discussing complex issues
of identity and cultural appropriation. We wondered: is voice used more often when
discussing people of color? Is it used to extol, essentialize, or both? Table 3 includes
the Top 5 (or so) “voiciest” writers reviewed in each corpus. These are the writers
with the highest percentage of reviews that mention voice.
Corpus
American
Periodicals Online
Review Corpus

Top 5 Voiciest Writers, per Corpus
1. Eudora Welty
2. John Updike
3. Jayne Philips, Reynolds Price, and James Thurber
(tie)
4. Isaac Bashevis Singer, Don DeLillo, William Gaddis
(tie)
5. James Baldwin, Dave Eggers, Louise Erdrich, David
Gates, Adam Haslett, Alice McDermott, Joyce Carol
Oates, William T Vollmann (tie)
The Paris Review 1. E.L. Doctorow
Author Interviews
2. Joy Williams
3. Hilton Als
4. Frank Bidart
5. Sam Shepard
Blurbs
1. Wiley Cash
2. Adam Haslett
3. Lila Bowen
4. Jami Attenberg, Lisa O’Donnell (tie)
5. Elizabeth Crook, Emma Donoghue, Maria Semple
(tie)

225

VOICE

Goodreads
Reviews: Canon

Goodreads
Reviews:
Prizewinners

Goodreads
Reviews:
Bestsellers

1. William Faulkner
2. William Gaddis
3. Samuel Beckett
4. Edward Morgan Forster
5. Robert Heinlein
1. Louise Erdrich
2. Barbara Kingsolver
3. Philip Roth
4. Marilynne Robinson
5. Saul Bellow
1. Stephen King
2. Kathryn Stockett
3. James Patterson
4. John Grisham
5. Suzanne Collins

Table 3. The voiciest writers in each corpus.

In no corpus does voice appear to be over-applied to writers of color. It may be that
this usage — voice as central to a liberal “diversity” discourse — is somewhat more
recent than the average date of reviews in our corpus (1994 and 2003 in the Times
and Paris Review, respectively). Or it may be that an author-centric approach to
studying voice, as we have taken above, is less useful than a topic-centric approach.
That is to say, voice may be used in relation to topics like discrimination in
publishing (like #OwnVoices) or a desire for inclusivity (“Emerging Voices”), but
less frequently for discussing any specific writer. Still, voice is a frequent enough
concept in vernacular literary criticism to warrant investigation beyond these highlevel word counts. How is voice used when it is a topic of concrete discussion?
Where do reviewers find voice in a text, on the page? What makes a voice distinctive
or appropriative? How do you know when you’ve found it?

The Voice You Find May Not Be Your Own
Regardless of the outlet, there are clear trends in voice’s use in contemporary
vernacular literary criticism. Having located examples of voice across corpora, we
winnowed our total number of reviews down to a manageable selection and began
to read. Our analysis suggests that vernacular literary critical evaluations of voice
fall into two broad categories: the internal and the external. These two categories
226

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

may also be conceptualized as the textual and the paratextual, or the formal and the
critical. Indeed, the term voice is sometimes used to refer to paratextual or
extratextual elements — like a writer’s ethnic affiliation, generational status, or
professional reputation — and sometimes used to distinguish a writer’s prose style
or her handling of character and dialogue.
Reviewers invoke the concept of voice at its broadest to designate an author’s
relationship to a community, presuming a direct affiliation between an author and
that community. This is the type of voice that operates in the publishing industry’s
desire for “emerging voices.” In this context, critics use voice to imply that a writer
can speak to or for a community, be the voice of a generation, or “give voice” to a
historically underrepresented group or an overlooked problem. For instance, as
Philip Caputo writes in The New York Times, Viet Thanh Nguyen’s The Sympathizer
“fills a void in the literature, giving voice to the previously voiceless while it compels
the rest of us to look at the events of 40 years ago in a new light.” Nguyen is able to
rectify the “voicelessness” of the Vietnamese people, Caputo argues coyly, because
of his own heritage: “Nguyen, born in Vietnam but raised in the United States, brings
a distinct perspective to the war and its aftermath.”22 The Implied Author is
irrelevant; what matters is that Nguyen’s “distinct perspective” is tied to his
Vietnamese heritage, which allows him to speak on behalf of the Vietnamese
(whether or not he claims to do so himself).
Caputo’s assumptions about Nguyen’s racial identity and those of the Times’s
audience (“the rest of us”) are hardly new or surprising; indeed, these sorts of
statements are made regularly about minoritized writers. Marco Portales’s 1984
review of Love Medicine praised Louise Erdrich, who had just “found her Native
voice.”23 By 1993, Josh Getlin was writing in the Los Angeles Times that Erdrich
had become “A Voice No Longer Ignored” — though Getlin’s lede elides the
distinction between Erdrich’s voice and that of Native Americans broadly: “Louise
Erdrich’s success helped ensure that Native American fiction became a flourishing
genre. But she says publishers have much to learn.”24 Though these reviewers clearly
mean to praise Erdrich, their discussion of her voice is deeply essentializing.
Whether or not Erdrich or Nguyen purport to be representatives for or speak on
behalf of their respective communities, reviewers presumed that these were the goals
of American ethnic writers, or of works that are about marginalized groups. (This is
the stated goal of #OwnVoices.)

227

VOICE

More narrowly and traditionally, reviewers use voice to refer to the writerly qualities
that make an author uniquely identifiable as himself, without any presumption about
an author’s relationship to an external community. This is the voice purportedly
found in the MFA classroom, the authorial position from which authors write what
they know. This type of voice is developed over time, a kind of skill that reviewers
evaluate with endless adjectival clarifications. Janet Maslin’s Times review of
Michael Chabon’s Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay works on each of these
registers: “In a cameo-studded book . . . that echoes Ragtime, just as it sometimes
suggests John Irving in fanciful mode, Mr. Chabon tells a bustling, convoluted story
in an eloquent, exceptionally precise voice.”25 Maslin emphasizes Chabon’s literaryhistorical bona fides when arguing that the novel is indebted to both Doctorow and
Irving, but Kavalier and Clay is ultimately written in Chabon’s “precise voice” —
that is, precisely not Doctorow’s or Irving’s. Chabon’s voice is eloquent,
commanding a “convoluted” story with exceptional skill.
Voice is also used to refer to internal dimensions of a text, as in the voice of the
narrator or characters, and direct speech or dialogue. Speaking of his novel World’s
Fair in The Paris Review, E.L. Doctorow discusses voice in each of these ways,
demonstrating the interconnectivity of voice as formal concept:
To me the more interesting change has to do with the voice
of the major narrator, the protagonist, Edgar, who as he
recalls more and more of his childhood, as he passes from
infancy to youth, takes on the voice of an articulate child.
The diction changes, the tone changes, as if Edgar is
gradually possessed by his memory. So there’s a kind of
two-voiced effect, I think, the man recalling, but in the
boy’s higher pitch.26
Here, Doctorow uses the term to refer to “the major narrator,” who is also “the
protagonist,” whose speech ages according to the passage of time, as Edgar is
“gradually possessed by his memory.” The change in Edgar’s extradiegetic narration
(“takes on the voice of,” “the man recalling”) becomes embodied in a way that is
normally associated with characterization (“as if Edgar is gradually possessed”), and
is marked by changes in the representation of oral speech (“diction,” “tone”, “the
voice of an articulate child”, “the boy’s higher pitch”) — this is diegetic voice,
speech represented in writing and rooted in sound, represented textually. Doctorow
uses the term flexibly: Voice slips through the different levels of narration, binding
228

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

the represented speech of characters to the body of the imagined narrator to the hand
of the author.
Voice is often used to describe narrators and narration, particularly in employing
free-indirect discourse or first-person narration, as in the case of Paul Berman’s NYT
review of Philip Roth’s The Plot Against America: “The dignity, the formality,
sometimes even the hint of academic reserve in the narrator's voice produce two
vibrating timbres, and these dominate the novel — a timbre of explosive anger, and,
when the clapper swings to the other side, a timbre of husky pathos.”27 The voices
of narrators and characters are often linked: Roth’s narrator, Philip, is also the central
character of the novel. As Berman’s review makes clear with its invocation of
timbre, vibrations, and tone, sound is at the very core of voice — that is, speech, as
a form of sound emanating from a body, represented in writing. Reviewers use voice
to refer to dialogue, particularly when rendered in dialect. And herein lies voice’s
central problem. The affinities between Roth, the author, and Philip, his narrator, are
quite clear. However, the (perceived) relationship between Character Voice and
Author Voice is often incredibly fraught, concerning both skill and cultural
appropriation.
Anxieties about an author’s ability or right to represent others are often expressed in
terms of “ventriloquizing.” A 1986 review of Kate Vaiden by Reynolds Price
addresses the mismatch between the gender of the author and his central character,
calling Price’s “successful creation of a female voice […] a tour de force,” in contrast
to a “showy ventriloqual act.” Price defends himself against the implicit critique,
telling interviewer Rosellen Brown, “I felt that I could write in her voice — I was
given birth by a woman and I was reared by women. A writer can function outside
the narrow mental and physical confines of a particular gender.”28 In this case, and
in 1986, Price is commended for his authorial skill, for transcending his gender to
create a wholly convincing voice for a female character. But more often, the
misalignment between author and character voices is rife with questions of
appropriation. Voice is thus a strongly normative term, rarely used in a way that
doesn’t imply approbation or disapprobation.
Consider, for instance, the mixed reviews for Kathryn Stockett’s The Help, a 2009
white-savior narrative about a journalist named Skeeter who writes an exposé on the
poor treatment of African American domestic workers in Jackson, Mississippi, after
witnessing the poor treatment of her own maid, Aibileen. Stockett (a white woman)
claims that she wrote The Help while homesick, trying “to comfort myself by writing
229

VOICE

in the voices of the people I missed,” drawing on her personal relationship with
Aibileen’s real-life analogue.29 Janet Maslin called the novel “ultimately winning,”
but expressed reservations: “The trouble on the pages of Skeeter’s book is nothing
compared with the trouble Ms. Stockett’s real book risks getting into. Here is a debut
novel by a Southern-born white author who renders black maids’ voices in thick,
dated dialect.”30 Goodreads reviewers were not as forgiving as Maslin:
I felt that the author played to very stereotypical themes,
and gave the characters (especially the African American
ones) very inappropriate and obvious voices and structure
in terms constructing their mental character. I understand
that the author wrote much of this as a result of her
experiences growing up in the south in the 1960's, and that
it may seem authentic to her, and that she was even trying
to be respectful of the people and the time; but, ultimately,
I thought that it was written from a very narrow, idealized,
almost childish perspective of race relations without a true
appreciation of the humanity and soul of the characters. . .
. The author would benefit from exploring authentic
African American voices (Richard Wright, James
Baldwin, Zora Neale Hurston, Langston Hughes, Toni
Morrison, Alice Walker, Maya Angelou) and
understanding the scope, range and (most important) the
foundation of the emotions genuine African American
characters express as a result of their journey as a people
in the US (hope, frustration, drive, passion, anger,
happiness, sadness, depression, joy).31
Here, the dialect employed by Stockett is a stereotypical appropriation, a sort of
literary blackface. A good voice is connected to being “authentic” and “genuine,”
having a “true appreciation of the humanity and soul of the characters,” and to
“understanding” real feelings (“hope, frustration, drive, passion, anger, happiness,
sadness, depression, joy”); a bad voice manifests in “stereotypical themes,” being
“inappropriate and obvious,” having a “very narrow, idealized, almost childish
perspective.” Voice carries this reviewer anywhere they need to go: the
representation of human speech, characterization, the author’s biography, depictions
of emotions, political and racial consciousness. At the same time, voice is not just a
230

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

catch-all: it maintains a link to the bodies of both characters and the author, and to
the relation between text and community.

Every Voice that Rises Must Converge
How, then, are we to understand how voice fits in a larger discourse? To answer this
question, we turn to Goodreads and to computational modeling. Goodreads is a
prime site of vernacular criticism because of the diversity of perspective and the
intensity of engagement it offers. Goodreads users are professionals, amateurs, and
in-between. Well-known writers (such as Roxane Gay), book reviewers (like Ron
Charles), and what we might call “literary influencers” (like Anne Bogel, blogger
and podcast host better known by the moniker The Modern Mrs. Darcy) maintain
their own accounts. These writers often repost reviews published elsewhere to
Goodreads and engage more directly with their audiences than would be possible in
a magazine like The New Yorker or a newspaper like The Washington Post.
Goodreads facilitates lively conversation amongst reviewers in comments and
replies; these are not formal reviews but engagements in critical conversation about
books under review. Unlike published book reviews, Goodreads book reviews are
not static. Often, Goodreaders will update their reviews in response to other
reviewers or conversations in comments, indexing shifts in their thinking and
contributing to the development of a critical vocabulary. Vernacular literary
criticism flourishes in this sort of conversational, dialogic space: users develop,
critique, and transform a shared critical language that is specific, but not limited, to
the platform.
In other words, Goodreads enables us to ask the question: How does voice function
within vernacular literary criticism? We’ve seen that voice appears to be related to
genre, primarily restricted to conversations surrounding literary fiction; we’ve seen,
too, that voice relates to style and technique, something evident in writing itself. We
restate these questions computationally: what is the semantic connection between
“voice” and other related terms, like “style”? Word Embedding Models (WEMs) are
an effective computational method for modeling these relationships, enabling us to
extrapolate the ways in which words are used. WEMs are built on the premise that
word-to-word co-occurrence can help us understand semantic meaning; by this
logic, words that appear together very frequently are not only statistically correlated
but semantically related. For instance, ice and solid are likely to occur frequently
with the word water, and infrequently with the word tuxedo.32 WEMs also allow for
231

VOICE

mathematical operations. In addition to querying individual words (the top 40 words
associated with voice, for instance), we can also add one word to another to come
up with a new set of meanings (what is the result of combining Voice and Genre?),
or subtract one word from another (what is Style without Voice?) to understand the
differences between concepts. In what follows, we investigate the relationships
between voice, style, and genre that circulate on Goodreads. We find that Goodreads
reviewers use the word voice in order to identify aspects of style that cannot be
attributed to genre.
Figure 1 shows the Top 50 words associated with voice in our Goodreads corpus.
This table can be read from left to right, top to bottom, with each word descending
in its strength of association with the word “voice.” In Goodreads reviews, voice is
used when discussing different people. Conceptually, voice is most nearly related to
a Narrator, as well as other person-centric words: Person, Character, and Author,
His, and Her. For Goodreaders, voice is primarily internal to the text; though both
terms are present, “Narrator” is more closely related to voice than “Author’s.”
Likewise, Goodreaders more strongly associate voice with sound than with writing
— an implied body from which voice emanates. Voice includes sound and bodies,
both a speaker and a perceiver: Speaks/Speaking, Tone, Sound, Dialogue, Hear, Ear.
Voice implies a physical presence, sound emerging from a physical, embodied point
of origin. Voice is physiological, not only emanating from bodily organs (Mouth)
but also perceived by other bodily organs (Ears).
This is not to say that voice is merely a synonym for speaking or narration.
Goodreads reviewers also trade in the language of individuation when discussing
voice. Voice is personal — Distinctive, Unique, Own — and related to a particular
Perspective. Presumably, this reflects moments in which Goodreaders critique the
voice of the author. This does not necessarily imply hierarchy, but distinction; if
voice is “inevitable in any act of novelistic communication,” as Hale asserts, then it
is to be expected that Goodreaders would take notice, and that voice would
distinguish one author or book from another. But the presence of “Own” in this
vector perhaps suggests that Goodreaders have adopted the language of #OwnVoices
— that corporate language surrounding diversity has infiltrated vernacular literary
criticism as a shorthand for addressing thornier issues of representation,
signification, and appropriation. Regardless, most Goodreaders understand that
voice is something a person posesses that is in some way related to identity, whether
that person is a narrator or character, or an author.
232

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

“Voice”
Goodreads
Voice
Narrator
Consciousness
Personal
Narration
Voices
Style
Speaks
Distinctive
Mind

Narrative
Mouth
Stream
Perspective
Unique
Tone
Character
Telling
Sound
Approach

Dialogue
Author’s
Writing
Omniscient
His
Manner
Own
Storytelling
Her
Characterization

Way
Inner
Her
Ear
Name
Speaking
Prose
Strong
Whose
Makes

Figure 1: The top 40 words associated with the word "voice,” comprising the voice vector, in a GloVe model of the
Goodreads Corpora. Table should be read from left to right, top to bottom, with each word descending in its strength
of association.

By contrast, Goodreads reviews suggest style is not endemic to a person, but a skill
that one develops; style is related less to authenticity than technique (figure 2). When
Goodreaders discuss style, they are more likely to discuss the writing rather than
communication. While Goodreads users do not seem to closely associate voice and
craft, they clearly associate style with literary technique: Writing, Prose, Narrative,
Characterization, Tone, Structure. Voice is embodied and aural, whereas style is
technical and written. Here, the terms that Goodreads users most closely associated
with voice and style prove instructive. Voice is most closely associated with
Narrator, Consciousness, and Person; style is most closely associated with Writing,
Prose, and Narrative. Narrator vs. Narrative. This raises the question: how does one
perceive the voice of a narrator if not through writing, prose, and narrative?

“Style”
Goodreads
Style
Writing
Prose
Narrative
Language
Storytelling
Stream

Approach
Descriptive
Dialogue
Novel
Consciousness
Terms
Fashion

Quality
Structure
However
Way
Poetic
Use
Characterization
233

Though
Very
Literary
Tone
Form
Text
Although

VOICE

Author’s
Unique
Works

Work
Experimental
Narration

Description
Rather
Usual

Voice
Written
Found

Figure 2: The top 40 words associated with the word "style,” comprising the style vector, in a GloVe model of the
Goodreads Corpora. Table should be read from left to right, top to bottom, with each word descending in its strength
of association.

Remember: these results are not mere synonyms — “voice” doesn’t mean “narrator”
and “style” doesn’t mean “narration.” Rather, they map a conceptual relationship,
showing how these words accrue meaning relative to voice or style. These vectors
demonstrate that each term is used in distinct ways and is laden with different
associations. Voice is not merely the non-specialist’s way of talking about style. Yet,
there is clear conceptual overlap between voice and style; Voice appears in the Style
vector, and vice versa. Goodreads reviews that discuss Characterization, Tone, and
Author may be discussing either voice or style. The mathematical functions of our
model enable us to understand how these concepts are organized in a complex
system — how style and voice relate to one another, how one might perceive voice
through style, how voices may be stylish or stylized, or how one’s style might be
voiced or voicey. By subtracting voice from style and vice versa, we can extrapolate
differences between the concepts, inferring areas of overlap and singularity.
Style – Voice = Genre
Goodreads
Novels
Prose
Style
Works
Experimental Descriptive
Graphic
Century
Genre
Dated
SF
Enjoy
Sci
Romance
Fi
Thriller
Writing
Descriptions
Dense
Fiction
Victorian
USA
Gatsby
Structure
Urban
Figure 3: Vector math: the top 25 words that
result from the operation V(Style)-V(Voice)
in the Goodreads corpora.

234

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 3 shows the Top 25 words that result from the operation V(Style) – V(Voice).
The answer seems clear: Genre. When Goodreaders discuss style but not voice, they
turn to generic conventions — that which is independent of an author or character.
A number of the words in this Vector name genres specifically: SF, Sci Fi, Romance,
Thriller, Urban. The strong appearance of genre suggests that a writer’s adherence
to generic conventions supersedes the sort of unique, individual, or personal style
that we might call voice. Different genres require different styles and stylistic
conventions, easily identifiable by even a casual reader of westerns, fantasy, or
detective novels. A distinct voice is not necessary to categorize a novel within a
genre and may in fact distract from the typical conventions associated with genre
fiction. To frame this perspective another way, Goodreaders who read for style
without considerable attention to voice are more concerned with formulas and
convention; style without voice tends toward the formulaic.
Science Fiction, romance, and thrillers are traditionally associated with the popular,
the middle- to low-brow, and pulps. Graphic novels and “urban” novels — an
unfortunate industry term referring to fiction by and about African Americans that
has not been deemed worthy of the more general (and higher-status) descriptor,
literary fiction — have not historically been highly esteemed. Each of these genres
has been castigated as predictable and conventional; in the case of romance novels,
Janice Radway has demonstrated that the formulaic nature of the plot is part of what
makes the genre so appealing to its die-hard readers.33 The stylistic conventions
demanded by these genres, we argue, take precedence over any individual or unique
claim to authorial style. Genre is not where voice is found.

Style – Genre = Voice
Goodreads
Descriptive
Elegant
Prose
Sometimes
Spare
Description
Style
Eloquent
Repetitive
Sentences
Lyrical
Choppy
Voice
Writing
Verbose
Occasionally
Poetic
Rhythm
235

VOICE

Dialogue
Sparse
Tedious
Descriptions

Repetition
Dialog
Ornate

Figure 4: Vector math: the top 25 words that
result from the operation V(Style)-V(Genre) in
the Goodreads corpora

Goodreaders do, however, discuss style with no mention of genre, presumably
engaging in some type of formal analysis (figure 4). In these instances, they
emphasize the language, and in particular, its aural qualities — lyric, poetic, rhythm.
While style without voice left us with an entirely impersonal vector, style without
genre emphasizes the personal and individual dimensions to writing: voice ( the fifth
most related word in the vector). In other words, in vernacular literary criticism,
voice is a type of style.
As a type of style, voice can be evaluated. Note the presence of adjectives:
Descriptive, Spare, Repetitive, Lyrical, Verbose, Poetic, Sparse, Tedious, Elegant,
Eloquent, Choppy, Ornate. This vector is far more attentive to the quality of
language than generic or stylistic conventions. While the results of Style – Voice are
preoccupied with identification, Style – Genre is far more interested in evaluation.
Although generic systems can be identified based on conventions (a spaceship is
unlikely to appear in a Western, say), these adjectives are contradictory, reflecting
an act of readerly aesthetic judgment: one reader’s Tediousness is another reader’s
Lyricism. Voice is not a standalone term; it requires adjectival qualification.
Given that style without voice is genre (style – voice = genre) and style without
genre is voice (style – genre = voice), we should expect that the combination of voice
and genre should equal style (voice + genre = style). As we can see in figure 5, the
equation holds: the top result is style. These concepts are, in fact, tightly related. In
both of these equations, when we subtract voice and genre from style (style – voice;
style – genre), style remains. By contrast, when we subtract style from either voice
(voice – style) or genre (genre – style), we are left with nonsense — as figures 6 and
7 demonstrate, the concepts do not meaningfully cohere.34 That is to say, style, voice,
and genre are not conceptually synonyms within vernacular literary criticism, though
they are intertwined. In sum:
1. Style consists of voice and genre (i.e., voice is a subset of style)
a. Style is bigger than and inclusive of both voice and genre
236

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

b. One can have style without voice (genre), but one cannot have voice
without style.
Goodreaders do not discuss voice or genre without also discussing style. Likewise,
Goodreaders always discuss style when discussing voice and genre. That is to say,
in vernacular literary criticism, voice and genre are both parts of — but not
synonymous with — style; voice and genre are subsets of style that, together, make
up a complex whole. Goodreaders do not discuss voice as an independent entity; it’s
not something that can be perceived or evaluated in isolation. Rather, o hear or
acknowledge or evaluate a writer’s (or narrator’s) voice is to discuss a facet of their
style — a personal, individual stylistic expression, wholly distinct from inherited
generic conventions.

Voice + Genre = Style
Goodreads
Style
Text
Voice
Works
Fiction
Novel
Genre
Mind
Sort
Kind
Writing
Usual
Consciousness Storytelling
Type
Author’s
Narrative
Fashion
Form
Stream
Fantasy
Unique
Perspective
Science
Literary
Figure 5: Vector math: the top 25 words
that result from the operation V(Voice) +
V(Genre) in the Goodreads corpora.

237

VOICE

Voice – Style = ?
Goodreads
Fens
Seacoast
Cryptographer Unremembered
Limba
Invalid
Clansmen
Unwed
Shawl
Ganged
Effecting
Leukemia
Javelins
Unborn
Fido
Spotless
Sulky
Latins
Hame
Moms
Undefeatable Scientists
Prying
Replying
Figure 6: Vector math: the top 24 words
that result from the operation V(Voice) V(Style) in the Goodreads corpora.

Genre – Style = ?
Goodreads
Pontiff
Transnational
Alcove
Pirated
Foursome
Bodybuilder
Ilium
Spoofs
Aficionados
Craze
Tub
Regent
Reservations
Classicists
Noblewoman Incontrovertible
Revivifying
Lapdog
Apologists
Synchronize
Spayed
Prelude
Pianos
Endowment
Have
Figure 7: Vector math: the top 25 words that
result from the operation V(Genre) V(Style) in the Goodreads corpora.

Voice is internal to a text; it is not reducible to an author’s identity but, because voice
is perceived to be both personal and embodied, it can be evaluated in relation to the
238

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

author. Voice might provide readers a unifying narrative by which they understand
and argue about a number of features internal and external to a text, as our qualitative
analysis suggests; however, each of those features are ultimately stylistic, whether
approached from a formal or a sociological angle.
The most important finding of this model, in our view, is not the content of these
conceptual relationships (which largely aligns with our qualitative reading) but that
these concepts cohere into a unified system. It is less meaningful, in other words,
that voice and style are used in different ways to refer to different things — a rather
obvious finding — than that the critical vocabulary of Goodreads is systematic and
specific. Vernacular literary criticism does not only concern itself with issues of
identification, concepts like the Bechdel Test, or discussions of tropes and “Easter
eggs.” Rather, through conversation and interactions, common readers on Goodreads
have developed vocabularies and systems of critique and evaluation. Just as romance
readers’ choice of books is governed by distinct codes and theories, as Radway
demonstrated nearly forty years ago, so too is vernacular literary criticism governed
by its own internal logic, so too does it maintain its own systematic critical idiom,
transforming inherited concepts into a distinct, though not unrelated, discourse.
Voice is just one part of this discourse, and perhaps not even the most significant
concept. But it demonstrates the value, we believe, in devoting further, sustained
attention to the ways that critique flourishes outside of formal literary institutions-and the value of exploring this discourse computationally, and at scale.
Whether a flashpoint for political debates or a part of a complex system of
evaluation, it is clear that voice can be found (almost) everywhere. But it does not
mean everything. Because voice is related to issues of authentic self-expression and
identity (per Hale), it allows readers to use it in order to approach a text
sociologically, linking a text to its larger social milieu via authorial identity. And
because the concept of “voice” is finally figurative — a writer’s or narrator’s voice
cannot literally be heard; it can only be read, conveyed in writing — it also provides
readers a way of approaching and discussing style, particularly those technical
aspects of style that evoke sound: rhythm, rhyme, etc. The alignment between these
two modes of perception (sociological and formal) and sites of analysis (paratextual
and textual) is the subject of much analysis and controversy: does the author’s voice
align with the voices she means to represent? Much (digital) ink has been spilled
over this question. Voice has become a shorthand through which readers intelligently
negotiate questions of contextualization and paratextual politics, authors relate their
239

VOICE

biographies to their writing, and the publishing industry structures the literary
marketplace.

References
1 We would like to thank the members of the Stanford Literary Lab, and especially Mark Algee-Hewitt, for
enthusiastic support and engagement with this project. Many thanks to Alexander Manshel and Annika Butler-Wall,
whose contributions on earlier iterations of this project contributed to central questions. J.D. Porter proved an
invaluable interlocutor, and his insights helped the project take this final shape.
2 Kevin Larimer, “We Mean Business: Twelve Agents Who Want to Read Your Work,” Poets & Writers, June 14,
2017.
3 Jonathan Karp, “10 Rules for Book Editors,” Publishers Weekly, October 20, 2017.
4 “About Us,” PEN America (blog), September 20, 2016.
5 Lee & Low gives a New Voices Award annually to a writer of color or a Native/Indigenous writer. “New Voices
Writing Contest for Picture Books | Lee & Low Books,” accessed January 30, 2020.
6 Mark McGurl, The Program Era: Postwar Fiction and the Rise of Creative Writing (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 2009), 230.
7 Ibid., 232.
8 Laura Heffernan and Rachel Sagner Buurma, “The Common Reader and the Archival Classroom: Disciplinary
History for the Twenty-first Century,” New Literary History 43, no. 1 (2012): 113-135.
9 Merve Emre, “Post-disciplinary Reading and Literary Sociology,” Modernism/modernity Print Plus, February 1,
2019.
10 Critics such as Katherine Bode have called for a more reader-focused model of a “literary system,” in which
readers are a crucial component of how a work “accrue[s] meaning. Katherine Bode, A World of Fiction: Digital
Collections and the Future of Literary History (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2016).
11 Droitcour writes in The New Inquiry, “Vernacular criticism can reject the guidelines set by cultivated artistic
tastes, or it can guilelessly speak in ignorance of them, or in its naive fascination with them can inadvertently expose
their falseness. Vernacular criticism is an expression of taste that has not been fully calibrated to the tastes cultivated
in and by museums. Vernacular criticism inscribes bodies in public spaces that would otherwise erase them.” Brian
Droitcour, “Vernacular Criticism,” The New Inquiry, July 25, 2014. https://thenewinquiry.com/vernacular-criticism/;
Lisa Nakamura, “Words with Friends: Socially Networked Reading on Goodreads,” PMLA 128, no. 1, (2013): 238243. Nakamura uses the phrase “vernacular criticism” to describe Goodreads in her PMLA article, yet she does not
develop the concept at length.

240

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

12 Scott Selisker, “The Bechdel Test and the Social Form of Character Networks,” New Literary History 46, no. 3
(2015): 505-523.
13 Miriam B. Hansen, “The Mass Production of the Senses: Classical Cinema as Vernacular Modernism.”
Modernism/modernity 6, no. 2 (1999): 59-77.
14 We would like to thank our undergraduate research assistants, Eun Ji Lee and Shana Hadi, for their invaluable
work building this corpus.
15 Our thanks to Alexander Manshel for providing us with this data.
16 Some of these lists were generated by lay readers, some by specialists, and some by publishing houses to boost
sales as the 20th-century came to a close. Owing to the distinct selection committees involved, this corpus contains
everything from the highly canonical (The Great Gatsby), to lesser-read experimental novels (The Ticket That
Exploded), to novels beloved by niche — and highly vocal — reading communities who advocated strongly that
their books make the list (Ayn Rand’s Atlas Shrugged or L. Ron Hubbard’s Battlefield Earth).
17 We recognize that these are contested categories; we use these terms as broad heuristics, rather than normative or
stable categories. As we explain below, we take “literary fiction” as a genre category for publishers’ BISAC codes;
we take novels shortlisted for prizes and novels appearing on the bestseller list as proxies for “prestigious” and
“popular” fiction.
18 The high number of words in each interview might be why this 78% figure is so much higher than that of, say,
our results for the MLA International Bibliography: why wouldn’t an author eventually use the word Voice if they
were prompted to talk about their work for long enough?
19 Foote had originally been a novelist, and he explains how he transitioned to writing history: “Always, anything I
write takes place at a certain time and a certain place. I think time, era, and place — geographical location — are
very, very important to me and what I’m doing . . . I guess I have trouble with Waiting for Godot because it doesn’t
matter when or where it is.” In his description, Foote presents his writing as a mute document of times and places:
what matters is the setting, not who’s standing in it. In that light, his critique of Godot, a play about the incoherence
of speech — the plot, characters, and themes strip down to pure voice — makes sense. Even as a historian, Foote’s
methods are textual, not oral: the book he says he relied on the most for his history of the Civil War was The War of
the Rebellion: A Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies.
20 We used a book’s BISAC codes, as identified by publishers, to determine genre.
21 Matthew Wilkens, “Genre, Computation, and the Varieties of Twentieth-Century U.S. Fiction,” Cultural
Analytics, November 1, 2016.
22 Philip Caputo. “‘The Sympathizer,’ by Viet Thanh Nguyen,” The New York Times, April 2, 2015.
23 Marco Portales, “People With Holes in Their Lives,” The New York Times, December 23, 1984.
24 Josh Getlin. “A Voice No Longer Ignored: Louise Erdrich’s Success Helped Ensure That Native American
Fiction Became a Flourishing Genre. But She Says Publishers Still Have Much to Learn,” Los Angeles Times,
December 13, 1993.
25 Janet Maslin, “A Life and Death Story Set in Comic Book Land,” The New York Times, September 21, 2000.
26 George Plimpton, “E. L. Doctorow, The Art of Fiction No. 94,” The Paris Review 101 (1986).
27 Paul Berman, “‘The Plot Against America.’” The New York Times, October 3, 2004.

241

VOICE

28 Rosellen Brown, “Travels with a Dangerous Woman,” The New York Times, June 29, 1986.
29 Motoko Rich, “A Southern Mirrored Window,” The New York Times, November 2, 2009.
30 Janet Maslin, “Racial Insults and Quiet Bravery in 1960s Mississippi,” The New York Times, February 18, 2009.
31 “Caroline’s Reviews > The Help.” Goodreads: The Help, September 22, 2009.
32 See Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning, “GloVe: Global Vectors for Word
Representation,” Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(2014).
33 Janice A. Radway. Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular Literature (Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press, 2006).
34 Similarly, these equations do not work with any other corpus in our collection. We take this failure to be less a
matter of G oodreads’ relative coherence than a matter of corpus size. Our Goodreads corpus is larger than any of
our other historic corpora, aside from the Historic Literary Criticism corpus.

242

