Journal of
Cultural Analytics

April 20, 2021

Introduction: Contemporary Culture
After Data Science
Richard Jean So
Richard Jean So, McGill University

ABSTRACT
This essay introduces the articles found in this special joint issue of Post-45 and the Journal of Cultural
Analytics, "Post-45 by the Numbers." It foregrounds the affordances of computational methods for the study
of contemporary culture and literature, and offers brief summaries of each of the eight essays that follow in
this special issue.

The computational study of contemporary culture is experiencing something of a
renaissance across the university. Computer scientists are writing algorithms to
identify the emotional arcs of novels.1 Sociologists are building statistical models to
analyze why certain works of visual art resonate more than others.2 Electrical
engineers have scraped tens of thousands of book reviews from the online website
Goodreads.com to parse why some types of stories drive readers to talk to each other,
and what they talk about.3 Evolutionary biologists and cognitive scientists have
adapted models from information retrieval to study tens of thousands of popular
Western songs in order to understand cultural change and the evolution of cultural
taste.4
Contemporary culture’s unprecedented volume and accessibility — particularly as
born-digital artifacts — has largely driven this movement. Each year, approximately
600,000 novels are published in the United States.5 In 2019, more than 500 scripted
television shows were streamed or broadcasted.6 Currently, the fan fiction website,
An Archive of our Own (AO3), hosts six million works of fiction written across
40,000 fandoms.7 More than fifty billion images have been uploaded to the social
media platform Instagram.8 Much of this contemporary culture exists as forms
of data, scrapeable and accessible to researchers. This vast accessibility has
coincided with the rise of powerful new computational algorithms designed to parse
and analyze large amounts of text- and images-as-data. In the past decade,
contemporary culture and data science have emerged as unlikely, yet increasingly,
well-suited partners.

Journal of Cultural Analytics 4 (2021): 39-47. doi: 10.22148/001c.22335

INTRODUCTION: CONTEMPORARY CU LTURE AFTER DA TA SCIENCE

The affordances of digitized data and new computational methods have already
begun to leave their mark on a number of disciplines, from political science to
psychology, facilitating a series of disciplinary breakthroughs. The opportunity to
study culture at scale and through the lens of data has proven particularly
compelling. A large and growing number of colleagues at the university, far removed
from cultural-literary studies, have shown an intense enthusiasm for this new field.
And this enthusiasm is part of a broader trend in which quantitative scholars have
introduced quantitative methods, or used them in creative ways, to study topics
otherwise seen as resistant to such methods. For example, Avidit Acharya, Matthew
Blackwell, and Maya Sen have used new datasets to study the history of slavery and
its lingering (and as they show, underestimated) effects on contemporary voting
patterns in the Deep South.9
Yet, for the most part, humanities departments — departments of English and
literature, in particular — have been far slower to accept new data-driven and
quantitative approaches as part of their overall methodological toolkit. Excluding a
small group of digital humanists, humanities scholars of contemporary culture have
shown at best a minor interest in using the affordances of data science, particularly
born-digital cultural data, to study the vast amount of culture being produced today.
What has and continues to excite academic colleagues from outside the humanities
— what constitutes a rapidly growing and vibrant subfield of “cultural analytics” —
has failed to achieve mainstream influence within the humanistic fields ostensibly
most committed and best positioned to study, appreciate, and make sense of
contemporary culture.10
If anything, even the most minimal recent attempts to introduce computational
methods into literary and cultural studies have been met with hostility. Timothy
Brennan writes: “Rather than a revolution, the digital humanities is a wedge
separating the humanities from its reason to exist — namely, to think against
prevailing norms . . . The ‘results’ of DH, then, are not entirely illusory. They have
turned many humanists into establishment curators and made critical thought a form
of planned obsolescence.”11 It is not enough to ignore the work of our colleagues,
spread out across the university, interested in studying culture with data. That
interest needs to be policed and ultimately, resisted. The literature scholar alone
stands against this establishment — biology, computer science, statistics, political
science, economics, cognitive science, psychology, sociology, communications —
where apparently, “critical thought” does not occur.
More generously, there are defensible reasons for this resistance. Literary and
cultural studies scholars trained in qualitative methods strongly believe in the value

40

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

of these methods, and they have good reasons to do so. For one, close reading and
historical analysis allow for an understanding of the particularity of individuals and
individual works of art that new forms of data aggregation and analysis precisely
threaten to erase. Data science, understood in its commercial context, is the project
of using algorithms to classify individuals by consumer preference. More broadly,
journalists, politicians, and social scientists — not just literary and cultural studies
scholars — worry about the impact that such computational algorithms, as well as
the platforms that support them, such as Facebook and Twitter, have on public
discourse and democracy.12
This social crisis is felt to be echoed in the recent rise of data science programs, as
well as the decline of humanities departments, at North American universities.
Humanities research, particularly historically or theoretically motivated work, is
being devalued compared to applied research whose impact can be more easily
quantified in terms of public policy or scientific innovation. Over the past decade,
the entire humanities academic job market has been eviscerated, with no relief in
sight. Humanities graduate students cannot get academic jobs. Against this
backdrop, the encroachment of data and scientific methods into the humanities may
seem like the next inevitable step in assimilating cultural studies into a wider
neoliberal scheme.
The problem with this perspective, however, is that it views the meeting between the
humanities and the sciences entirely as a threat, rather than as an opportunity. It also
discerns the two as deeply polarized, antithetical opposites, rather than as
increasingly porous and open to exchange. The “neoliberal critique of the digital
humanities,” in my view, has been greatly overstated and not borne out in reality.13
Research in the computational humanities has not reduced cultural criticism to
robotic bean-counting, erasing ideological critique or historicism. Scholarship from
Lauren Klein, Ted Underwood, Andrew Piper, and Katherine Bode have actively
sought to integrate digital and computational methods with perspectives from gender
studies, critical race theory, deconstruction, and book history.14 There is a
fundamental difference in using these methods for instrumental reasons, such as
consumer research, and using them to deepen our understanding of social and
cultural problems. Fields like political science and economics are dominated by
statistics now, but in ways that have allowed them to critically study social problems,
such as the role that digital environments and tools play in magnifying social
inequality.
If we can’t understand the distinction between using quantitative methods for
instrumental versus critical-scholarly ends, then we will never be able to take

41

INTRODUCTION: CONTEMPORARY CU LTURE AFTER DA TA SCIENCE

advantage of their affordances to enrich our understanding of the socio-cultural
issues that we care about.
At the same time, institutionally, we have no evidence that data science programs
seek to abolish the humanities. If anything, we see the opposite: an array of
institutions, from the University of Washington to Emory, have partnered with
humanities departments to hire tenure track faculty. We can choose to sit this one
out as a form of aggrieved critical defiance. Or we can train humanities graduate
students who are eligible for these positions. The expansion of data science at the
university can directly contribute to the growth of the humanities.
Moreover, Brennan’s claim (echoed in a recent piece by Nan Z. Da) that cultural
studies has an unchanging, essential “reason to exist,” whether valorizing the
purported ineffable complexity of literature or “thinking against prevailing norms,”
and that the introduction of quantitative methods violates this purpose, itself does
not stand up to historical scrutiny.15 Rachel Buurma and Laura Heffernan have
written a new history of the literary studies discipline, focusing on the classroom.
Their history contradicts the belief that the introduction of quantitative methods into
literary and cultural studies represents a recent and alien phenomenon, dominated
by white men in cahoots with big tech. That belief “melts away when we look at the
earlier twentieth-century women professors, both on and off the tenure track, who
used classrooms as the original supercomputers.”16 A long-standing historical
tension between qualitative and quantitative methods — from I.A. Richard’s
“science of criticism” to Janice Radway’s reader response theory — has been both
deeply generative and constitutive for the literary studies discipline.17
At the same time, Matthew Handelman has written a new history of critical theory,
focusing on the Frankfurt School, that similarly debunks the belief that the critical
study of culture must always oppose quantitative reasoning and evidence. He
recovers a cohort of thinkers adjacent to Theodore Adorno and Max Horkheimer,
such as Gershom Scholem, whose “theories of aesthetics, messianism, and cultural
critique borrow ideas from mathematical logic, infinitesimal calculus, and geometry
to theorize art and culture that strive to reveal, and potentially counter the
contradictions of modern society.”18 Invoking critical theory as a bludgeon against
quantitative methods diminishes its power. It does not sustain or expand it. There is
a more capacious version of theory, one compatible with data science, that enriches
its legacy. It is one that “can help us confront and intervene in our digital and
increasingly mathematical present.”19
This last point is especially important. Contemporary culture is deeply implicated
and saturated by data. Few aspects of the production and reception of the arts today
42

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

are not touched, in some way, by algorithms, data science, and computational
processes. Much of what we consume, whether Internet-based streaming television,
Instagram photos, or physical books, comes to us already quantified and shaped by
non-human, algorithmic decision-making. For most people who produce, sell,
market, and evaluate art for a living, contemporary culture is in part a form of data,
which itself requires data-driven tools to further propagate.
For the most part, media and cultural studies scholars have developed a critical and
resistance-based posture towards this growing imbrication of data and culture.
Earlier, I cited important work by scholars such as Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Cathy
O’Neil and Safiya Noble, which analyzes and critiques the harmful impacts of
algorithms on society.20 This research program will expand in the years to come.
However, the discipline courts a peril in prioritizing this form of work to the
exclusion of all applied data-driven cultural research, including research that uses
data methods precisely to expose and critique the deleterious effects of data itself.
We risk neglecting methods and tools that can enrich our understanding of our
materials and the scholarly problems we work on. We also risk isolating ourselves
from the rest of the university and its community of scholars in the computational
social sciences and sciences. Overall, we risk being unable to contribute to important
data-driven research focused on combating the major problems of our time, whether
as a function of our autonomous discipline, or through interdisciplinary
collaboration with quantitative researchers.
Disciplines outside of the humanities feel profound excitement for the affordances
of data and data science. New scholarly paradigms are being constructed. That
enthusiasm is so strong that they have started to peer over their disciplinary borders,
finding a particularly compelling opportunity to analyze contemporary culture. Most
cultural studies scholars do not share this enthusiasm. The problem, as Ted
Underwood observes, is that this opportunity sounds like a great opportunity but a
great one for someone else.21 It doesn’t have to be this way.
The essays collected for this special joint issue of Post45: Peer Reviewed and
the Journal of Cultural Analytics offer a vision of contemporary cultural studies
when we do take advantage of this opportunity. Together, they present a new
dispensation in the development of the digital humanities and cultural analytics.
Specifically, these eight articles do not
• Make the polemical case for the validity of using computers to study culture.
• Discuss, debate, or treat the “digital humanities” as a meta-theoretical
academic topic.
43

INTRODUCTION: CONTEMPORARY CU LTURE AFTER DA TA SCIENCE

• Provide methodological primers on computational tools, like topic modeling.
Rather, they utilize data and data science methods, often in concert with traditional
humanistic methods, such as close reading and historical analysis, to study
contemporary culture, literature, and media in order to make original scholarly
insights and contributions. The essays do not engage in a “methods war” discourse.
They take as a given that quantitative and computational methods represent a valid
mode of analysis for the study of culture and literature. They assume the reader has
a basic familiarity with now staple computational methods in DH, such as
classification or topic modeling, or assume that readers are capable of familiarizing
themselves. With these assumptions in place, the essays spend the bulk of their space
on more interesting tasks, such as producing new interpretations of contemporary
fiction or creating novel analytical frameworks to study the circulation of short
textual content or Internet memes.
Some of the essays mobilize a computational apparatus in order to provide an
empirical foundation to long-standing qualitative intuitions or observations
regarding cultural history. Michelle Moravec and Kent Chang revisit a cohort of US
feminist bestsellers from the 1970s to parse how and why they helped to articulate
the idea of “feminism” in this period. Nicholas Kelly, Nicole White, and Loren Glass
analyze the effect that the University of Iowa’s creative writing program has had on
the geographical imagination of postwar American fiction. The goal of this work is
not to overturn decades’ worth of humanistic scholarship, but rather, to offer a
stronger quantitative baseline for their claims. And in doing so, this scholarship
allows us to ask a new set of questions, such as: When exactly did the geographical
imagination of postwar American fiction shift? Has it attenuated in the past
decades? If so, why?
Other essays use data and data science to develop a set of claims that more directly
challenge or reorient the assumptions of a subfield of contemporary cultural studies,
such as Asian American Studies or poetics. Dan Sinykin and Edwin Roland use
classification models to find a fundamental, under-studied distinction between
fiction published by “Big 5” conglomerate firms and fiction published by smaller
indie and nonprofit publishers. Long Le-Khac and Kate Hao perform a quantitative
meta-analysis of the rise of Asian American literary studies and its forms of literary
attention to find a series of under-appreciated or unnoticed inequalities. James Lee
and Ankit Basnet employ social network analysis to study the contemporary field of
American poetry at scale — particularly how it has been organized by anthologies
and audio archives — and make a series of novel discoveries as to what precisely
has animated this field.

44

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

A final group of essays turns its attention to the Internet, and the ways in which the
web has engendered a unique set of affordances for the expression and spread of
culture, particularly text-based culture. Here, they find that born-digital content
demands born-digital methods; for a cultural field that immanently exists at scale,
methods that work at the level of a single tweet or Instagram photo will necessarily
miss something very important. Scholars at the Stanford Literary Lab study the
increasingly ubiquitous category of “voice” within online cultural criticism; Melanie
Walsh and Maria Antoniak analyze the popular category of “the classic” on webbased reader platforms, such as Goodreads.com; Tess McNulty probes the recent
rise of the “sentimental anecdote” as a new cultural form, both on the Internet and
elsewhere in popular culture. Overall, these scholars find a new world of user-driven
cultural production, organized by a set of otherwise unfamiliar (at least to
academics) vocabularies, which require not only born-digital methods to make sense
of at scale, but also, as a consequence, new analytical concepts and paradigms.
Together, the contributors believe, as I do, that the best way to make the case for
digital methods for cultural analysis is to prove that digital methods can generate
useful and original insights and discoveries for cultural analysis. Computational
methods will only cease to appear alien to contemporary cultural studies when
enough contemporary cultural studies scholars actually use them. To this end, these
essays also mean to inspire and set the stage for future scholarship. Together, they
ask: what would it mean to see, along with so many of our non-humanities colleagues
across the university, new computational methods as an opportunity for cultural
studies, rather than an existential threat? We wonder: perhaps it’s time to let some
light in.

References
O-Joun Lee and Jason J. Jung, “Story embedding: Learning distributed representations of stories based on
character networks,” Artificial Intelligence 281 (2020): 5070-5074.
1

2

John W. Mohr et al., Measuring Culture (New York: Columbia University Press, 2020).

Shadi Shahsavari et al., “An Automated Pipeline for Character and Relationship Extraction from Readers Literary
Book Reviews on Goodreads.com,” WebSci '20: 12th ACM Conference on Web Science (July 2020): 277-286.
3

Matthias Mauch, Robert M. MacCallum, Mark Levy, and Armand M. Leroi, “The evolution of popular music: USA
1960 – 2010,” Royal Society Open Science 2, no. 5 (2015).
4

45

INTRODUCTION: CONTEMPORARY CU LTURE AFTER DA TA SCIENCE

5

A rough estimate reported in this article, back in 2013; we can reasonably expect that this number is an underestimate for the years since, up to 2020. Nick Morgan, “Publishing Your Book in 2013? Here’s What You Need to
Know,” Forbes, January 8, 2013.
As reported in this article: Lucas Shaw, “Hollywood Made 532 TV Shows in 2019, and It’s Going to Make
More,” Bloomberg News, January 9, 2020.
6

As currently reported on Wikipedia’s entry for the website: Wikipedia, s.v. “Archive of Our Own,” last modified
January 10, 2021, 9:06.
7

As reported by Salman Aslam, “Instagram by the Numbers: Stats Demographics & Fun Facts,” Omnicore, January
6, 2021.
8

9

Avidit Acharya, Matthew Blackwell, and Maya Sen, Deep Roots: How Slavery Still Shapes Southern
Politics (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2018).
10

A growing number of research articles placed in major journals, like PMLA and Critical Inquiry, central to the
discipline, and a series of monographs published by major academic presses, such as the University of Chicago
Press and Columbia University Press, indicate that this is changing. Here I will flag a few recent books: Ted
Underwood, Distant Horizons: Digital Evidence and Literary Change (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2019); Katherine Bode, A World of Fiction: Digital Collections and the Future of Literary Study (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 2018); Andrew Piper, Enumerations: Data and Literary Study (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2018); Richard Jean So, Redlining Culture: A Data History of Racial Inequality and Postwar
Fiction (New York: Columbia University Press, 2020), and Eric Bulson, Ulysses by Numbers (New York: Columbia
University Press, 2020). But overall, the percentage of literary and cultural studies scholars working in this area is
relatively miniscule.
Timothy Brennan, “The Digital Humanities Bust,” Chronicle of Higher Education, October 15, 2017.

11
12

For example, see Wendy Chun, Programmed Visions: Software and Memory (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2011);
Safiya Noble, Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism (New York: New York University
Press, 2018), and Cathy O’Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and Threatens
Democracy (New York: Crown Books, 2016).
See for example, David Allington, Sarah Brouillete, and David Golumbia, “Neoliberal Tools and Archives: A
Political History of Digital Humanities,” Los Angeles Review of Books, May 1, 2016.
13

I have already cited work by these scholars; here I would just add Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren Klein, Data
Feminism (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2020) and a piece I co-wrote with Edwin Roland, “Race and Distant
Reading,” PMLA 135, no. 1 (January 2020): 59-73.
14

For the first type of claim, see Nan Z. Da, “The Computational Case Against Computational Literary
Studies,” Critical Inquiry 45 (Spring 2019): 601-639.
15

16

Rachel Buurma and Laura Heffernan, The Teaching Archive: A New History for Literary Study (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2020), 11.
Ted Underwood’s “A Genealogy of Distant Reading,” DHQ 11, no. 2 (2017) offers a useful history of quantitative
methods in literary criticism; see also Michael Gavin’s helpful “Vector Semantics, William Empson, and the Study
of Ambiguity,” Critical Inquiry 44 (Summer 2018): 641-673.
18
Matthew Handelman, The Mathematical Imagination: On the Origins and Promise of Critical Theory (New York:
Fordham University Press, 2019), 2.
17

19

Ibid., 2.

In an earlier footnote I cite the work of Chun, Noble, and O’Neil; here I would add Frank Pasquale, Black-Box
Society: The Secret Algorithms That Control Money and Information (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2015)
20

46

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

and the more recent, Ruha Benjamin, Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim Code (New York:
Polity Press, 2019).
21

Ted Underwood, “Machine Learning and Human Perspective,” PMLA 135, no. 1 (January 2020): 92-109.

47

