Journal of
Cultural Analytics

April 20, 2021

Squatter Regionalism: Postwar Fiction,
Geography, and the Program Era
Nicholas M. Kelly, Nicole White, and Loren Glass
Nicholas M. Kelly, New Mexico Tech
Nikki White, University of Iowa
Loren Glass, University of Iowa
Peer-Reviewer: Mark McGurl
Data Repository: 10.7910/DVN/CQURIW

ABSTRACT
In this article we use computational methods to establish that the Program Era has altered the
traditional understanding that a regionalist writer writes about the region in which they grew up.
Using the Iowa Writers’ Workshop as an example, we prove that many writers now write about
the region to which they moved to study and/or teach creative writing. Using a database of
demographic information about faculty and students alongside computational analysis of place
names in a curated corpus of work produced by prominent Iowa-affiliated writers, we map
authorial career itineraries onto the geographic locations referenced in their fiction, visualizing
the ways in which the relationship between writer and place has been inflected by the
Midwestern location of the Workshop. We found that Iowa references are significantly higher
than in a comparable corpus of postwar literature. They are also significantly higher in
percentage terms than Iowa’s population as a proportion of the US population. Finally, we found
that the works in our corpus most centrally focused on Iowa are, overwhelmingly, not authored
by Iowa natives. Instead, we have identified a cohort of squatter regionalists, authors whose
writings prominently feature the state in which they received their MFA, found faculty
employment, or (frequently) both. This trend, we believe, may also be evident in works by
authors from other MFA programs, which would confirm our larger hypothesis that the
professional itineraries mandated by the Program Era have influenced the regional settings of
postwar
American
fiction.

The last chapter of Tom Lutz’s landmark study Cosmopolitan Vistas: American
Regionalism and Literary Value (2004) is ambitiously titled “The New New
Regionalism and the Future of Literature.” In it, Lutz reminds us that while
conventional literary history confines classic regionalism to the turn of the twentieth
century, a “large number of recent writers are also closely associated with the locales
that are featured in their fiction and where they (usually) have a home.” Lutz lists
some of these writers, and then designates Chris Offutt’s first short story collection,
Kentucky Straight (1992), as an example of “classic literary regionalism.”1 What
Lutz neglects to mention is that Kentucky Straight began as an MFA thesis at the
University of Iowa Writers’ Workshop. While Offutt ended up writing about (and
ultimately returning to) his home state, many of his colleagues at Iowa would choose
to live in and write about their adopted state and region. Marilynne Robinson, Jane
Journal of Cultural Analytics 4 (2021): 75-109. doi: 10.22148/001c.22332

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

Smiley, W.P. Kinsella, and John Irving are just a few examples of writers not from
Iowa who nevertheless set much of their fiction in this hitherto neglected state.
What constitutes or enables a “close association” with a place for an American
writer? For traditional regionalism, it almost invariably meant that the author was
born and grew up in the region featured in their fiction. And while Lutz concedes
that recent regionalist writers may have more attenuated relations with the locales
they write about, he nowhere mentions that many of the figures he lists—including
Flannery O’Connor, Wallace Stegner, Ken Kesey, Wendell Berry, and Mary
Swander—forged their regional sensibilities in association with their careers as
students and teachers of creative writing. Is it possible that the Program Era has
altered the traditional relation between writer and region, creating a new genre that
could be called “squatter regionalism”? How might we use computational methods
to prove the existence of such a genre?
For the last few years the Program Era Project (PEP), a collaborative initiative
supported by the University of Iowa’s Digital Scholarship and Publishing Studio
(DSPS), has been gathering demographic information about Iowa-affiliated writers
alongside textual metrics of their work. From a variety of sources both internal and
external to the University, we have built a database of graduation dates; thesis titles,
genres and advisors; and hometowns (and we’re working on publishers, agents,
prizes, and employment history). With the invaluable assistance of a data capsule
provided through an Advanced Collaborative Support (ACS) Award from the
HathiTrust Research Center (HTRC), we have also curated an expansive corpus of
work produced by approximately 300 University of Iowa-affiliated writers.
Together, this data enables us to map the career itineraries of these writers onto the
geographic locations referenced in their fiction, visualizing the ways in which the
relationship between writer and place has been inflected by the Midwestern location
of the Iowa Writers’ Workshop (IWW).
Our findings, on the whole, support our hypothesis about the existence of a distinct
phenomenon we’re calling squatter regionalism, though we will need further
research to confirm its scale, scope, and significance. Using a custom-built text
analysis tool, we have tracked location references in our corpus, determining which
states are most frequently mentioned. We found that, while New York and, to a lesser
extent, California predominate, Iowa references are significantly higher than in a
comparable corpus of postwar literature collected through the TxtGeo project. They
are also significantly higher in percentage terms than Iowa’s population as a
76

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

proportion of the US population. Most telling, we found that the works in our corpus
most centrally focused on Iowa are, overwhelmingly, not authored by Iowa natives.
Instead, we have identified a cohort of squatter regionalists, authors whose writings
prominently feature the state in which they received their MFA, found faculty
employment, or (frequently) both. This trend, we believe, may also be evident in
works by authors from other MFA programs, which would confirm our larger
hypothesis that the professional itineraries mandated by the Program Era have
influenced the regional settings of postwar American fiction.

Background, Methods, Corpus
To assess regional representation in our corpus, we built a text analysis tool that
counts state-related toponyms, including state names, state capitals, the fifty most
populous cities in the U.S., and the four most populous cities in each state.2 As
previous scholarship documents, disambiguating terms that can refer to multiple
places (Washington State or Washington, DC) or even multiple things (George
Washington, University of Washington, The Washington Companies) poses a
significant challenge for toponym tracking. Different studies have taken varying
approaches to address this challenge. For his study of location representation in Civil
War-Era American Fiction, Matthew Wilkens used named entity recognition to
acquire his initial collection of place names. He then evaluated these extracted
location references manually based on the context in which they appeared, excluding
false positives or unclear references.3 For their study of geospatial semantics in the
Scottish Poet Ossian, Eric Gidal and Michael Gavin4 used a technique developed by
David A. Smith and Gregory Crane for the Perseus Project. This complex method
involves mathematically representing known place references on a contextual grid
of values and then connecting an ambiguous toponym to a place by assessing its
location on this grid.5
We use context to disambiguate place references in a way that we hope will be more
transparent and comprehensible to students and scholars less familiar with
computational analysis. Our tool works by first counting unambiguous place
references, then using that information to assign the ambiguous place references to
states. For instance, the tool will count unambiguous mentions of places in
Washington State, Washington, D.C., or false positive instances of Washington used
as a last name. Based on the representation of each unambiguous category (city,
state, name), the tool then proportionally assigns ambiguous instances of just
77

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

“Washington” to the appropriate category.6 Our aim with this disambiguation
process is to employ a simple, transparent, and easy-to-understand heuristic that can
account for the semantic ambiguities of place names.
Because regionalism is primarily used to categorize fiction, we decided to limit our
corpus to this genre. We then narrowed it down further to works that feature at least
10 location references. Finally, the first and last five pages of all texts were removed
to eliminate place mentions found in publication or biographical information. These
criteria left us with a corpus of 500 works of fiction by approximately 150 authors.

Mapping Corpus Data: Regionalist Test Cases
Despite Wilkens’s legitimate challenge to regionalism as a literary historical
category, the term continues to be associated with the period of its emergence in the
late-nineteenth century, when it was canonized as a mode of literary realism.
Wilkens’s significant findings complicate without undermining this traditional
periodization. The regionalist writer during this era was invariably from the region
they wrote about. A liminal figure, the classic regionalist straddled the distance
between the peripheral location where they were raised and the metropole where
they inevitably migrated to pursue a literary career.
From a selection of classical regionalist texts that exhibit this traditional relationship
between writer and place, we use our tool to establish a baseline for comparison and
map the development of regionalist writing over the last century. For each author,
we provide a pair of choropleth map visualizations, each based on a different method
of measuring the location references in the author’s corpus. In the first method, we
take each text in an author’s corpus separately and determine what percentage of the
total location references each state represents. We then find the mean of each state’s
percentage across texts, allowing us to see, on average, what percentage of total
place references is made up by each state. This method, we believe, enables us to
visualize location references with each text on an equal footing. Longer works (or
works with more total location references) can’t outweigh shorter works (or works
that are less location dense). For our second method, we take the author’s entire
corpus and find what percentage of total state references each individual state
represents. With this approach, we can register how consistently an author has
mentioned a state or its locations across the entire body of writing available. An
advantage of this method is that instances where a single text (or a small number of
78

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

texts) have an extremely high percentage of references will not skew the overall
measurement. This is particularly useful if these high percentages come from texts
that have a lower overall number of location references. In most of the following
examples, the results of each method differ little. Together, these methods measure
both how often a state features prominently within each text in a corpus and how
often a state appears throughout the entire corpus.

79

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

Figure 1. Average, Total Mentions by State, Hamlin Garland (1860-1940)
Born in Wisconsin. Raised in the Midwest.7

We begin with Hamlin Garland, whose geographical trajectory and career arc can be
considered representative of classic regionalist writers more generally. Born on a
farm in Wisconsin, Garland was an avid reader and an ambitious writer, determined
to escape from his humble origins and make a literary name for himself on the East
Coast. He moved to Boston as a young man and promptly caught the attention of
William Dean Howells, editor of The Atlantic Monthly and arbiter of literary realism
in the United States at the turn of the twentieth century. Garland’s initial success
came with the publication of his collection of semi-autobiographical short stories,
Main-Traveled Roads, which focused on what he termed the “Middle Border,” the
agricultural region that had been the West but was becoming what we now call the
Midwest. Garland would continue to mine this region for literary gold over the
course of his career, achieving particular recognition for his autobiography, A Son
of the Middle Border. Like most regionalism of this era, Garland’s work is defined
80

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

by its author’s simultaneous origins in and departure from the location upon which
he focuses. This personal distance maps onto the geopolitics of the literary world
and publishing industry of the time, which was based on the East Coast, a region that
Garland wrote about later in his career after he had achieved recognition as a
regionalist, accounting for the prominence of New York and Massachusetts on our
maps.

81

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

Figure 2. Average, Total Mentions by State, Sarah Orne Jewett (1849-1909).
Born in Maine. Lived entire life in New England 8

We now turn to Sarah Orne Jewett, a regionalist writer who never left New England,
the region where she was born and about which she wrote. If Garland wrote about a
region that was coming to prominence as an agricultural (if not cultural)
powerhouse, Jewett wrote about a region that was passing away, as the shipping
industry based in New England began to fade and populations dwindled. Jewett’s
work is thus doubly nostalgic, marking a region that was not only lost to her but also
vanishing from the modern socio
economic order. Her family had lived in New
England for generations, so she was documenting a culture she knew well. Based in
the seaport town of South Berwick, Maine, Jewett was close to Boston, both
geographically and professionally, where like Garland, she received crucial
encouragement and patronage from William Dean Howells. Jewett’s regional
affiliations were more proximate than Garland’s, but the same pattern of nostalgia
and loss dominates her fiction.
82

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

With these test visualizations of classic regionalism and the ones to follow, our tool
essentially tells us what we already know. This is a good thing, confirming that we
can reliably use it to explore regional trends and patterns in more recent texts.
Moreover, we can later use this data to pull and examine macro level trends in
regional representation, allowing us to explore the research questions raised by this
project at a larger scale. To do this, we first need to briefly consider the period which
intervenes between classical and squatter regionalism.
Literary modernism in the United States explicitly disavowed the representational
aspirations of regionalism and established its own cosmopolitan credentials over and
against the seemingly parochial concerns of what was dismissively called “local
color” writing. Indeed, many American modernists abandoned the United States
altogether, emigrating to Paris to join the expatriate bohemian communities of
interwar Europe, where liquor was legal and the dollar was strong. Many of them
left the United States imaginatively as well, choosing to write about Americans
abroad. The author who stood out as the foundational exception to this rule was
William Faulkner, whose native modernism established the South as America’s
region par excellence. Faulkner’s resistance to the North’s modernity would come
to define the emergence of America’s literary identity as such under the powerful
academic auspices of the New Critics, Southerners all.

83

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

84

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 3. Average, Total Mentions by State, William Faulkner (1897-1962).
Born and raised in Mississippi.9

85

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

86

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 4. Average, Total Mentions by State, William Faulkner (1897-1962).
(Jefferson and Yoknapatawpha included)

William Faulkner famously situated his most significant works of fiction in the
South generally and in Mississippi specifically, and this regional concentration is
visibly evident in the figures above. Faulkner’s South, it’s worth emphasizing, is the
Confederate South, concentrated in the Eastern section where the major battles of
the Civil War were fought. Faulkner’s use of fictional names for key locations
presents the first example of a common feature of modern regionalist texts. To reveal
the degree to which these fictional names focalize location references in a corpus of
this type, we have added Jefferson and Yoknapatawpha to our search for the second
set of visualizations, bringing Mississippi into proper focus. The relative absence of
New York and New England in Faulkner’s corpus is worth noting as a testimony to
the degree to which these regions had lost much of their cultural authority during the
87

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

interwar years. Boston came to be seen as hopelessly parochial and “genteel,” and
New York, while still the capital of the American publishing industry, was perceived
as more concerned with commerce than culture. Cultural authority had
correspondingly shifted from commercial magazines such as the Atlantic and
Harper’s to little magazines, frequently based in Europe and, increasingly,
university-based journals such as the Kenyon Review.

Figure 5. Total Mentions by State, Flannery O’Connor (1925-1964).
Attends Iowa Writers’ Workshop, 1946-47.10

Flannery O’Connor’s career marks the transition from Faulkner’s interwar South,
and its regional identity based in its underdevelopment by the industrial North, to an
emergent regionalism based in the rise of creative writing programs, initially in the
Midwest and West. If O’Connor wrote almost exclusively about her native South,
she honed her style at the Iowa Writers’ Workshop under Andrew Lytle, a Southern
88

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Agrarian on loan from Vanderbilt. The alliance between the New Critics based at
Vanderbilt and Kenyon College and the faculty at the Iowa Writers’ Workshop was
exceptionally close during this formative period, and O’Connor’s institutional and
regional straddling is representative of this proximity in the immediate postwar era.
Robert Penn Warren and Robert Lowell were both visiting professors in the English
Department in these early years, and Austin Warren and René Wellek wrote Theory
of Literature at Iowa while
Paul Engle, the proud Midwesterner who directed
O’Connor’s thesis, was building the Workshop from an obscure experiment into a
worldwide phenomenon. Engle’s extensive network helped stitch the New Critical
bastions of Vanderbilt and Kenyon to Washington, DC, New York City, and, by way
of those metropoles and their powerful cultural bureaucracies and deep-pocketed
foundations, to the world.
As Stephen Wilbers emphasizes, the Iowa Writers’ Workshop itself developed out
of regionalist sensibilities, but Midwestern regionalism would come to adopt a more
accommodating attitude toward the surrounding world than the Southern
Regionalism championed by the New Critics.11 Mark McGurl affirms that
“Midwestern regionalism, as exemplified in Engle, looked outward and sought
prestige through expansion [while] the Southern regionalists insisted that the
regionalist project must turn inward and achieve literary excellence through
exclusion.”12 The intersection between these two regionalist sensibilities, one insular
and exclusionary and the other open and inclusive, laid the groundwork for the
squatter regionalism that would characterize the Program Era.
It is important to situate squatter regionalism in the larger context of the GI Bill and
the postwar boom in higher education in the United States. Louis Menand notes that
between 1945 and 1975, “the number of American undergraduates increased by
almost 500 percent and the number of graduate students by nearly 900 percent.” 13
Before WWII, the experience of “going away to college” was restricted to a
relatively narrow band of (mostly male) cultural and economic elites, and it was
certainly not the best option for a young person with literary aspirations. English
departments were primarily philological in method, focused on British as opposed
to American literature (which was rarely acknowledged as such); young Americans
who wanted to be writers looked for apprenticeship in Europe, not higher education
in the United States.
According to historian James Gregory, “World War II set off the greatest sequence
of human migration in American History.”14 After WWII, demographically diverse
89

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

access to postsecondary education expanded exponentially, making “going away to
school” a national rite of passage for the American middle class, and graduates
would frequently become as affectively attached to their college towns as their
hometowns. Many of these college towns were in the Midwest, where massive
(mostly public) multiversities began to draw students from the coasts, reversing the
outward flow associated with classic regionalism. Indeed, mobility as such increased
in the postwar era, so that Americans were less likely to have grown up in a single
place for their entire childhood and also less likely to remain in a single place for
their entire adulthood. In this more mobile environment, the college experience for
many Americans supplemented or even replaced childhood as a period and place of
sentimental attachment, generating the affective conditions of possibility for the
creation and circulation of squatter regionalism.

Squatter Regionalism
“Squatter regionalism” designates those authors who write about the region in
which they studied or taught creative writing, as opposed to the region in which they
grew up. As initial examples, we offer a collection of authors associated with the
Iowa Writers’ Workshop who, though not Iowans, came to adopt and embrace Iowa
and the Midwest as focal points for their writing. We will use our visualizations to
confirm the degree to which a selection of these authors mention Iowa specifically
or the Midwest generally in their fiction.
Our first example of squatter regionalism is Marilynne Robinson, recently retired as
the F. Wendell Miller Professor of English and Creative Writing at the University of
Iowa. Robinson was born in Sandpoint, Idaho, where her first novel, Housekeeping,
takes place. After arriving in Iowa in her early forties, she became fascinated with
the region and astonished by the relative absence of literary fiction representing it.
She decided to write some herself, eventually publishing a series of celebrated
novels with the
fictional Midwestern town of Gilead, Iowa as their
geographic and cultural focus. As with Faulkner, our second pair of visualizations
include “Gilead” in the search terms.

90

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

91

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

Figure 6. Average, Total Mentions by State, Marilynne Robinson Born in Idaho. Professor of English, Iowa Writers'
Workshop (1991-2016)15

92

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

93

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

Figure 7. Average, Total Mentions by State, Marilynne Robinson Born in Idaho. Professor of English, Iowa Writers'
Workshop (1991-2016) (Gilead Included)

The illustrations above map Robinson’s version of the Midwest, which shades over
from Iowa into Missouri and Kansas, where episodes in her saga take place. Insofar
as Robinson expressly seeks to do for Iowa what Faulkner did for Mississippi, it is
worth noting that Missouri and Kansas are border states where the racial conflicts of
the South came up against the predominantly white culture of the Midwest. In a
sense, Robinson uses Faulkner’s South as a model for a culturally distinct region and
imports it into a state whose regional identity has traditionally been vague and weak.

94

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

95

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

Figure 8. Average, Total Mentions by State, John Irving (1942- ).
Born and raised in New Hampshire. MFA, Iowa Writer’s Workshop (1967).
Taught at Iowa Writer’s Workshop (1972-1975).16

We now turn to John Irving who, in an increasingly common creative writing career
arc, has been both a student and a teacher at the Iowa Writers’ Workshop. Irving was
born in Exeter, New Hampshire, and much of his fiction takes place in New England.
His work offers the first instance where our dual methods present notably different
results, though both maps still indicate that Iowa, like New England, features
prominently in his work. Indeed, many of his protagonists, like him, travel back and
forth between the two locations. In our first map, which averages the proportions of
location references by book, Iowa averages 14.5% of state mentions, second behind
New York at 19.4%. In the second map, which totals location references across the
author’s oeuvre total numbers, Iowa sits as the top spot with 17.6% of mentions,
96

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

rising above New York, which has 16.8% of total references. We believe this
variation is due to the density of location references in many of Irving’s works. In
our fiction corpus, Irving’s novels often rank among the most location rich. Hotel
New Hampshire has nearly 700 location hits, while
Until I Find You and The
Water-Method Man both have roughly 400 hits. In his most location-heavy works,
Iowa references are dominant. For instance, in The Hotel New Hampshire, Iowa’s
references are more than triple New York’s. And Iowa references are double New
York’s in The Water-Method Man, a work which features a former University of
Iowa graduate student as its protagonist. Collectively, such location-heavy, Iowaheavy works tip the balance when Irving’s averaged representation numbers are
compared to state representation in the total corpus.
Given Irving’s sustained popularity across the late twentieth century, it is not a
stretch to say that many readers, both in the United States and around the globe, first
come to know Iowa as a state and the Midwest as a region from this writer, New
England born and bred. As with Robinson, we find a writer who bolsters the image
of the Midwest by mapping it in terms of a more well-known and well-established
regional identity. Its agricultural identity gets supplemented by an institutional
itinerary associated with the postwar boom, where college towns loom large.
Last, we consider W.P. Kinsella, a writer closely associated with Iowa, though he
was born and raised in rural Alberta and didn’t arrive in Iowa City to attend the
Writers’ Workshop until he was well into adulthood. Though he only spent a few
years in the state, he dedicated a series of magical realist novels and short story
collections to it.
The Iowa Baseball Confederacy (1986) directly draws from
(indeed parodies) Wilbers’s history of the Writers’ Workshop (Wilbers was working
on his history as a doctoral dissertation when Kinsella matriculated). Shoeless Joe
(1982) was adapted into the blockbuster film Field of Dreams (1989), which put
Iowa on the cultural map, catapulting the little-known state to global prominence
and enhancing its appeal as a tourist destination.
Kinsella appropriated not only a region but a culture, as many of his characters are
indigenous inhabitants of Iowa (itself an indigenous term, as are many places in the
state), upon whom he bases the state’s folklore and cultural identity. While his
decision to write fiction based in Iowa was uncontroversial, his representation of
native voices has received frequent criticism as cultural appropriation. In a sense,
indigenous voices do for Kinsella what race does for Robinson: they create a
groundwork of cultural conflict out of which regional identity emerges.
97

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

98

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 9. Average, Total Mentions by State, W. P. Kinsella (1935-2016).
% of Total Mentions from Full HTRC Corpus Collection.17

With Kinsella, we again see a divergence between averaged and totaled maps. In the
averaged visualization, New York maintains an edge at roughly 21%, though Iowa
also has a notable degree of representation at 9%. These high New York averages
come from a handful of Kinsella works that mention New York locations much more
than other state locations (i.e. Born Indian, Dance Me Outside) but, compared to
Kinsella’s Iowa writing, have a lower number of place name mentions. Kinsella’s
investment in Iowa becomes truly apparent when we look at the percentages across
his entire corpus. Here we see how Iowa becomes the center of Kinsella’s geographic
imagination, even though he only lived there for a brief period.18

99

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

Corpus Comparison and Demographic Data
Wilkens found in his study of nineteenth-century texts that geographic reference
counts are often tied closely to state population. Therefore, he suggests that a fruitful
way to measure and explore the representation of states in a given corpus would be
to “compare the fraction of all named-location occurrences that fall with a region to
that region’s fraction of the overall population.”19 Along these lines, we compared
recent census data on what percentage of the U.S. population lives in Iowa with the
average percentage of state references to Iowa in our Workshop corpus to see if, and
how much, the percentages differed. Current 2017 estimates of state and national
population by the U.S. Census Bureau put Iowa’s population at approximately
3,145,711 and the national population at approximately 325,719,178. This means
Iowa currently represents about .97% of the U.S. population.
This tracks well with TxtGeo’s numbers for Iowa. As the image below indicates,
when the TxtGeo tool is asked to produce a state-based breakdown of place
references found in books published between 1930 and 2015 and categorized under
the Library of Congress Classification “Language and Literature,” TxtGeo finds that
Iowa comprises 1.058% of references, about 1.10 times the population figure. By
contrast, in our corpus the average Iowa Writers’ Workshop text references Iowa 3.2
times, more than three times as often. If we count just the total mentions for each
state, the number increases to approximately 4.2 percent, four times the population
figure.

100

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 10. Total Mention by State, TxtGeo Corpus,
Average, Total Mention by State HTRC/PEP Fiction Corpus

While New York and California represent a large percentage of the location
references found in our corpus, looking at the averaged and total mention
percentages reveals some significant details. First, after the prominence of New
York and California (which account for approximately 30% of total place
references), there is a rapid drop off in how often states are mentioned. Illinois and
Massachusetts average approximately 5%, about half of California (with 10% of
total mentions) and a quarter of New York (with 20%). More significant for our
purposes is Iowa’s location in the rankings of frequently-represented states; it ranks
6th in terms of average percentage of total mentions and 5th in total mentions, much
higher than its ranking of 27th in the TxtGeo corpus.
We now turn to geographic trends in IWW graduation cohorts. Since the founding
of the PEP, the team has worked to collect publicly available demographic data on
Workshop students and faculty. Most significantly for this project, we collected selfdeclared hometowns from graduation ceremony programs held in the University
Archives. When rankings of the top states listed by IWW graduates are first
examined, the results initially suggest a surprisingly high representation of Iowa.

101

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

State

Graduates

% of Total

IA

822

29.89091

NY

266

9.672727

CA

236

8.581818

IL

148

5.381818

PA

109

3.963636

MA

106

3.854545

OH

76

2.763636

NJ

64

2.327273

TX

58

2.109091

CT

51

1.854545

Figure 11. Top 10 States Listed as Hometown, IWW Graduation Records

We hypothesize that this prominence is caused by the considerable number of
Workshop graduates who claim Iowa City as their hometown, even though many if
not most of them were not born or raised there. Unlike undergraduates, graduate
students frequently list their current location as their hometown, rather than the place
in which they were raised. Furthermore, many of the early IWW cohorts were older
than the average graduate student; they were returning to school after stints in the
service or disappointments with their initial careers. Many were married with
children and happy to call Iowa “home.” We can easily compare graduate records
with external biographical information to find cases of hometown false positives
attributed to Iowa City or Coralville (a city adjacent to Iowa City). For example,
both Jane Smiley, who was born in Los Angeles and grew up in Missouri, and T.C.
Boyle, who was born and raised in New York, listed Iowa City as their hometown.
This very fact supports our hypothesis insofar as it indicates the frequency with
which writers who come to Iowa City adopt it as their “home.” When we remove
102

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Iowa City and Coralville from our list, we get a much more realistic picture of
geographic representation in IWW graduate cohorts, shown below listing the top 10
states (figure 12).
State

Graduates

% of Total

NY

266

12.79461

CA

236

11.35161

IA

151

7.263107

IL

148

7.118807

PA

109

5.242905

MA

106

5.098605

OH

76

3.655604

NJ

64

3.078403

TX

58

2.789803

CT

51

2.453102

Figure 12. Top 10 States Listed as Hometown, IWW Graduation Records
(Iowa City and Coralville Removed)

Through these figures, we get a clearer picture of where Workshop students come
from. Iowa remains highly ranked, though some of this prominence could still be
tied to students living in communities near Iowa City and listing their current
locations as hometowns. It is, of course, worth noting the prominence of New York
and California as 24% of graduates, nearly one in four, list either New York or
California as their home state. Over one in eight graduates list New York as their
home. This clearly demonstrates that there is an established pattern, tracing back to
the origins of the Workshop, of coastal residents migrating to Iowa to acquire an
103

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

MFA. A considerable number remain or return. Again, it is worth noting how
dramatically this reverses demographic trends extending back to the era of classic
regionalism, when American writers left the rural heartlands for the urban coasts and
beyond.
By combining our demographic information about hometowns with our textual
metrics, we are able to confirm our hypothesis regarding “squatter regionalism” and
the Program Era, at least as it concerns the Iowa Writers’ Workshop.
Author Name

Work Name

IA % of Total
Mentions

Cassill, R. V.

The happy marriage, and other stories 51.35135135

McCracken, Elizabeth

Niagara Falls all over again

48.553054466

Irving, John

The water-method man

46.678526

Irving, John

3 by Irving

40.94853409

Cassill, R. V.

Three stories

40

Stuckey-French, Elizabeth The first paper girl in Red Oak, Iowa; 38.11881188
and other stories
Shields, David

Heroes

33.83806071

Smiley, Jane

At paradise gate

31.94444444

Kinsella, W. P.

Shoeless Joe

31.58414213

Tiempo, Edilberto K.

Finalities: a novelette and five short 28.88888889
stories

Irving, John

The Hotel New Hampshire

28.37671402

Grumbach, Doris

The spoil of the flowers

28.12656956

Yates, Richard

Young hearts crying

28.10110326

Smiley, Jane

A thousand acres

27.7027027

Wittinger, Ellen

Lombardo’s law

25.66666667

Stefaniak, Mary Helen

Self storage and other stories

24.3902439

Schramm, Wilbur Lang

Windwagon Smith and other yarns

22.64150943

Godwin, Gail

Evenings at five

22.22222222

104

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Irving, John

The 158-pound marriage

20.125

Cheever, John

Oh, what a paradise it seems

20

Haldeman, Joe W.

Camouflage

19.62616822

Cassill, R. V.

Collected Stories

19.3043674

Louie, David Wong

The barbarians are coming: a novel

18.57923497

Grumbach, Doris

The magician’s girl

17.6744186

Kinsella, W. P.

The further adventures of Slugger 16.93693694
McBatt: baseball stories

Figure 13. Top 25 Works, Iowa % of Total Location Mentions

The chart above starkly illustrates the degree to which most of the Workshop writers
who focus on Iowa in their work are not from Iowa originally. It lists the 25 novels
or short story collections in which Iowa has the highest percentage of location
references. Other than R.V. Cassill (who ultimately left Iowa), none of these authors
are Iowans. Rather than (or in addition to) writing about where they’re from, they’ve
decided to write about where they’ve gone, where they ended up, permanently or
temporarily, in pursuit of their careers in creative writing. Their focus has been
sustained enough, we think, to transform the geographic imagination of the postwar
era. Prior to the Program Era, Iowa was next to invisible in American literature, and
the Midwest featured mostly as a place people left. Now, Iowa is a central node in a
world literary network, and the Midwest has emerged as a location of extensive
thematic and cultural interest.
From our graduation data, we can see how the Workshop draws students from across
the United States. Our analysis of Workshop fiction shows that while our authors
often gravitate towards writing about the coasts, their location references to Iowa
make up a significantly higher percentage of total location references than
comparable corpora. When we look at the works that reference Iowa most
frequently, we see that an overwhelming majority of those works were authored by
Iowa visitors or transplants. Furthermore, Iowa has become, both nationally and
internationally, a required stop on the professional itinerary of any creative writer of
any reputational stature, enhancing its prominence in the regional imaginary of
postwar fiction.

105

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

The increasing precariousness of the academic job market has only enhanced this
prominence. In 2011, Poets & Writers conducted a survey of 640 MFA program
applicants, assessing which MFA programs the potential students applied to. Of the
640 survey participants, 404 (63%) applied to the Workshop. The second highest
ranked program in the survey (University of Michigan) saw only 221 applications
from survey respondents.20 According to a 2015 New York Times article on MFA
applications and employment, the Workshop received 1380 applications for 50 open
spots that year. The piece goes on to note that about 20,000 applications would be
sent to MFA programs in 2015, and that 3,000 to 4,000 MFAs would graduate. For
those thousands of graduates, 112 tenure-track creative writing positions were
available.21 In short, if a common creative writing maxim may be “write what you
know,” socioeconomic and reputational forces dictate what places the most
promising writers are likely to get to “know.” Add to this the increasing prominence
of memoir and autofiction in the contemporary literary field and the expansion of
writing programs at the University of Iowa (which currently includes the
International Writing Program, the Nonfiction Writing Program, the Translation
Program, and the Center for the Book, among others), it should not be surprising that
Iowa appears with increasing frequency in literary fiction and nonfiction.
We speculate that similar patterns in attendance and representation may be seen in
work produced in other prominent programs, such as Stanford for the West, but
that’s material for another study, a study to be drawn from corpora yet to be
assembled. We hope that our initial exploration of the Iowa Writers’ Workshop and
our collaboration with HathiTrust’s ACS program offer a model that other
institutions could follow, should they be interested in exploring the potential
significance of their own MFA programs on literary geographic representation.
Additionally, it is our hope our collaboration with HathiTrust suggests a path
forward for scholars of contemporary literature attracted to computational
methodologies but stymied by the access difficulties of working with texts in
copyright.
It is for these reasons that we seek to analyze, with our technology and our
computational methods, geographical representation in our corpus in a way that is
as transparent and technically legible as possible. We deliberately strive to develop
methods that could invite discussion from both technically sophisticated and
traditionally trained literary scholars, methods that avoid, whenever possible, a
perception that our visualizations emerge from a computational black box. We invite
and welcome suggestions on methods and techniques, ways to rethink or improve
106

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

our tool both computationally and in its statistical grounding. Particularly, we invite
any suggestions
regarding the disambiguation process, perhaps the thorniest
component of any location-tracking technology. Our aim is to integrate what
suggestions we can while, ideally, maintaining intelligibility.
Simultaneously, we acknowledge the limitations, in terms of both corpus and
technology, in this study. Our tool leans towards urban rather than rural locations.
Our corpus, while the largest of its kind assembled, is not representative of
Workshop writing as a whole. Indeed, given that none of the IWW theses have been
(or are likely to be) digitized, the task of creating a truly representative corpus is
perhaps impossible and certainly unlikely.
Nevertheless, we believe that our analysis offers the most comprehensive mapping
to date of the geographic imaginary of the Iowa Writers’ Workshop and could
indicate larger geographic trends in postwar fiction. Both institutionally and
aesthetically, there remains much to be examined, mapped, and better understood
about the Program Era. We offer this exploration as one model of how future
scholarship might chart a course into this literary territory.

References
1

Tom Lutz, Cosmopolitan Vistas: American Regionalism and Literary Value (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
2004) 191-92.
2

In a few cases, some variations on these criteria were employed to help produce more accurate results. Our tool
does not count “Washington” as referring to the state of Washington. It excludes references to geographic features
that are also state names. City names that are common first names (Charlotte, Norman) are omitted. City names that
are geographic features (Mesa, Butte) are omitted. Extremely common city names shared across states (Springfield,
Columbus) are omitted. When a city in a state is omitted, the next most populous city in that state is included
instead. The tool also tracks references to well-known city nicknames such as “Windy City,” “Sin City,” or “Big
Apple.”
See Matthew Wilkens, “The Geographic Imagination of Civil War-Era American Fiction,” American Literary
History 25:4 (Winter 2013): 804.
3

See Michael Gavin and Eric Gidal’s “Scotland’s Poetics of Spcace: An Experiment in Geospatial Semantics” in
Cultural Analytics at https://culturalanalytics.org/article/11072-scotland-s-poetics-of-space-an-experiment-ingeospatial-semantics .
4

107

SQUATTER REGIONALISM

5

By gathering archives of place names from external sources, relying on unambiguous contextual place references,
and weighing the overall likelihood of a place reference, Crane and Smith map the possible locations with which a
given term might be associated on a grid. They then assign the ambiguous term to the location to which it most
likely refers based on a combination score of its similarity to the last four location references in the text and the
location reference that most closely aligns to the centroid of their weighted reference score map.
6

Such false positives are excluded from any state-related count as the disambiguation tool collects context. For
instance, the tool simultaneously filters out and keeps count of any “Mr. Henderson” “Mrs. Henderson” “Sgt.
Henderson” etc. while counting for potential references to Henderson, Nevada. The tool also employs a list of over
8,000 first names collected by Stanford’s Natural Language Toolkit to track for any cases of a first name + city
name combination to exclude these false positives from city counts.
7

Works Included: A Spoil of Office, The Captain of the Grey Horse Troop, Cavanagh, Forest Ranger, A Daughter
of the Middle Border, The Eagle’s Heart, A Little Norsk, Main-Travelled Roads (Collection), The Moccasin Ranch,
Money Magic, A Pioneer Mother, Prairie Folks (Collection), Rose of Dutchers Coolly, The Shadow World, A Son of
the Middle Border, The Spirit of Sweetwater, The Light of the Star, They of the High Trails, The Trail of the Gold
Seekers, The Tyranny of the Dark, Victor Ollnee’s Discipline, Wayside Courtships (Collection).
8

Works Included: A White Heron and Other Stories (Collection), An Arrow in a Sunbeam and Other Tales
(Collection), Betty Leicester’s Christmas, Betty Leicester: A Story for Girls, A Country Doctor and Selected Stories
(Collection), The Country of Pointed Firs, Deephaven and Selected Stories and Sketches, The Life of Nancy
(Collection), A Marsh Island, Old Friends and New (Collection), The Queen’s Twin and Other Stories (Collection),
Strangers and Wayfarers (Collection), The Tory Lover.
Works Included: A Fable, Soldier’s Pay, The Hamlet, The Sound and the Fury, The Town, Absalom Absalom!, As I
Lay Dying, Intruder in the Dust, Mosquitoes, Requiem for a Nun, Sanctuary, The Mansion, The Unvanquished, The
Wild Palms.
9

10

Works Included: Collected Works. Because this corpus consists of a complete, single collection, there is only one
metric for percentage of total mentions.
Stephen Wilbers, The Iowa Writers’ Workshop: Origins, Emergence, Growth (Iowa City: University of Iowa
Press, 1980) 3-18.
11

12

Mark McGurl, The Program Era: Postwar Fiction and the Rise of Creative Writing (Cambridge:
University Press, 2009), 151.

Harvard

13

Louis Menand, The Marketplace of Ideas: Reform and Resistance in the American University (New York: W.W.
Norton, 2010), 64.
James N. Gregory, “Internal Migration: Twentieth Century and Beyond,” in Oxford Encyclopedia of American
Social History (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 542.
14

15

Works Included: Gilead, Home, Housekeeping, Lila. Because only one work by Robinson was available from the
HTRC corpus, we have used a separate corpus of Robinson’s works for this map.
16

Works Included: A Prayer for Owen Meany, A Son of the Circle, Three by John Irving (Collection), A Widow for
One Year, Trying to Save Piggy Sneed (Collection), Until I Find You, The 158-Pound Marriage, The Cider House
Rules, The Fourth Hand, The Hotel New Hampshire, Setting Free the Bears, The Water-Method Man, The World
According to Garp.

108

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

17

Works Included: The Alligator Report (Collection), Born Indian (Collection), Box Socials, Brother Franks Gospel
Hour (Collection), Dance Me Outside, The Further Adventures of Slugger McBatt (Collection), Red Wolf, Red Wolf
(Collection), Scars (Collection), Shoeless Joe.
At this point, our tool doesn’t track international location references, other than for disambiguation purposes, so
we cannot include Kinsella’s Canadian locations in our visualizations. Our goal has been to determine the
representation of Iowa compared to other U.S. states. In addition to tracking U.S. territories, a future version of the
PEP tracking tool will include international representation and will hopefully offer new insights into the increasingly
global scope of the IWW particularly and creative writing programs more generally.
18

19

Wilkens, “Geographic Imagination,” 810.

20

Full survey results can be found at “2012 MFA Rankings: Top Fifty,” Poets&Writers.org, September 1, 2011.

21

See Cecilia Capuzzi Simon, “Why Writers Love to Hate the M.F.A.,”

109

