Journal of
Cultural Analytics

April 20, 2021

Against Conglomeration
Dan Sinykin and Edwin Roland
Dan Sinykin, Emory University
Edwin Roland, University of California, Santa Barbara
Peer-Reviewer: Kinohi Nishikawa
Data Repository: 10.7910/DVN/EUPMKL

ABSTRACT
In the 1980s, anxiety about the extensive and ongoing conglomeration of the publishing industry
led to the emergence of a movement of nonprofit publishers. It included counterculture figures
like Coffee House’s Allan Kornblum and Milkweed’s Emilie Buchwald, who got their start with
boutique letterpresses; political and aesthetic activists like Arte Público’s Nicolás Kanellos,
Feminist Press’s Florence Howe, and Dalkey Archive’s John O’Brien; and refugees from
conglomeration like Fiona McCrae and André Schiffrin. Nonprofits often defined themselves by
their support for literariness, and which they depicted as under threat from commercial houses,
which helped them gain support from private foundations, philanthropists, and government
agencies like the National Endowment for the Arts. We discovered that these two different ways
of structuring publishers’ finances—conglomerate and nonprofit—created a split within
literature, yielding two distinct modes of American writing after 1980. This essay characterizes
the two modes, explains how the split between them happened, and illustrates the significance
of this shift for the rise of multiculturalism. We pay particularly close attention to the careers of
Percival Everett and Karen Tei Yamashita.

1: Port Townsend
From Port Townsend, Washington, you can watch the Puget Sound meet the Salish
Sea: the small water turns west toward the open ocean. In 1982, James Laughlin
spent a week at a writers’ retreat in Port Townsend. He joined a small group that
included poet Tess Gallagher, her partner Raymond Carver, and Carver’s notorious
editor Gordon Lish. Carver had recently published his second short story collection
with Lish at Knopf. The two had become a literary power couple, the sine qua non
of dirty realism, triumphing amid a vogue for short fiction in a minimalist style.
As significant for literary history was Laughlin’s encounter with a young publisher
named Scott Walker who, for eight years, had been publishing Gallagher and other
poets from his nearby letterpress operation under the colophon of Graywolf Press.
Laughlin, the aging heir to a Pittsburgh steel fortune, was a publishing legend. In
1936, at the age of twenty-two and at the advice of Ezra Pound, he founded New
Journal of Cultural Analytics 4 (2021): 110-145. doi: 10.22148/001c.22331

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Directions, which quickly became the premier avant-garde publishing house, almost
synonymous with literary modernism in the US. Early on, Laughlin frequently
published adept attacks against Random House as the commercial foil to New
Directions, such as James T. Farrell’s “Will the Commercialization of Publishing
Destroy Good Writing?” in New Directions 9. Laughlin’s strategy was clever. Not
only was he filling, with his front and backlists, a market niche prepared by Random
House’s publication of work like James Joyce’s Ulysses and Gertrude Stein’s
oeuvre, but his attacks themselves were a commercial tactic. They made his brand.
Laughlin was “disavowing an interest in marketing while constantly trying to think
up new marketing techniques.”1 This is a familiar gambit: to claim authenticity by
differentiating oneself from a sell-out, then to use that authenticity for profit.
In Port Townsend, Laughlin and Walker struck up a friendship. In the ensuing years,
Walker would vacation at Laughlin’s ski resort in Alta, Utah, and Graywolf would
publish Laughlin’s lectures on Pound. Laughlin became a mentor and a model for
Walker as Graywolf emerged at the forefront of a movement: nonprofit publishing.
But in 1982, that all lay ahead. Graywolf remained close to its counterculture origins.
“Small was beautiful,” Walker later remembered.1 Dozens if not hundreds of flyby-night presses had sprouted and vanished since the late 1950s thanks to the
widespread availability of inexpensive mimeograph machines, a predecessor to
photocopiers. The Mimeo Revolution provided the print technology for the postwar
era’s leading poetry movements. Lawrence Ferlinghetti published Allen Ginsberg’s
Howl with a mimeograph in 1956. LeRoi Jones (later, Amiri Baraka) and Diane Di
Prima published the New York School, the Black Mountain School, and the Beat
Movement in The Floating Bear, sending mimeo newsletters to their mailing list
between 1961 and 1969.2 In the late 1970s and 1980s, photocopiers phased out
mimeographs:
Bruce
Andrews
and
Charles
Bernstein
launched
L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E through offset printing and photocopies. Beginning in the
mid 1980s, the personal computer made desktop publishing possible, phasing out
photocopying.
Walker was one of several publishers inspired by the Mimeo Revolution and a
counterculture arts-and-crafts ethos to learn how to use a letterpress to make
beautiful books. (He was taught by Sam Hamill and Tree Swenson of Port
Townsend’s Copper Canyon Press.) That was how he started, in 1974. That’s what
he was doing in 1982. He later claimed that he “didn’t make more than $7,000 the
first 10 years” and that he “almost gave up.”2
111

Against Conglomeration

He met Laughlin at a pivotal moment. Multinational conglomerates rapidly bought
out publishers in the late 1970s, leading authors to worry that the pressure to
prioritize the bottom line would ruin opportunities for good books.3 In 1980, E. L.
Doctorow, esteemed Random House writer and vice president of the American
Center of PEN International, confronted publishing executives over the fate of the
literary world before a committee of the US Senate. He and others argued that
conglomerates should be broken up to save literature. They lost that argument. But
desktop computing and improved infrastructure for distribution opened another way,
yet nascent in 1982. What if, like dance, opera, and orchestras, literary books could
be subsidized by state-sponsored grant funding and private philanthropy? Such
financial support would, according to this line of reasoning, liberate publishers from
the demands of the market. To access it, publishers would need to become nonprofit
organizations.
Over the next twenty-five years, nonprofit publishing transformed the US literary
landscape. Such publishers as Arte Público, Coffee House, Dalkey Archive, and
Milkweed made space for ethnic literatures, translations, and literary
experimentation. Graywolf became the most successful of all. In 2018, Graywolf
had a budget of $4 million. Its writers regularly win large awards, including the
National Book Award, the Pulitzer Prize, and MacArthur Grants. It is arguably the
New Directions of the twenty-first century.
State money and philanthropic money come with expectations. As nonprofits
published writing that the conglomerates deemed unfit for the market, they chose
and shaped that writing according to their own financial needs. What priorities
would funders, explicitly or not, want to see expressed in the literature they
financed? What would have success in nonprofits’ smaller but still consequential
markets? What values, aesthetic and otherwise, were encoded in the missions of
government units and foundations that could guide the editorial practices of the
nonprofits? Despite the cant of liberation, markets still mattered to nonprofits: their
innovation came from balancing market success with other priorities.
We discovered that these two different ways of structuring publishers’ finances —
conglomerate and nonprofit — created a split within literature, yielding two distinct
modes of American writing after 1980. This essay characterizes the two modes,
explains how the split between them happened, and illustrates the significance of
this shift for the rise of multiculturalism.
112

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

2: Burn This, Will You?
At the National Book Critics Circle award ceremony in 1990, Laughlin, by then a
septuagenarian, extended his lifelong refrain, denouncing big presses as “merchants
of canned cod who are ruining our culture” and urging the assembled critics to
devote their attention to small presses, including Coffee House and Graywolf.4 The
occasion for his ire was the firing of André Schiffrin, Pantheon’s managing director,
by Random House’s incoming CEO Alberto Vitale. Laughlin called it a “disgusting
scandal.”5 Doctorow, accepting the night’s fiction award as a Random House author,
said, “Even if no censorship was intended by its application of its own bottom-line
criteria to its Pantheon division, the effect is indeed to still a voice, to close a door
against part of the American family.”6 Laughlin criticized what he viewed as the
formulaic production of conglomerate publishers. Doctorow called on publishers to
prioritize the national interest over the bottom line.
Schiffrin’s firing was an event in the publishing world. Under his leadership,
Pantheon had built a reputation as a leftist bastion, home to Simone de Beauvoir,
Noam Chomsky, Marguerite Duras, and Michel Foucault. Vitale’s predecessor,
Robert L. Bernstein, had long insulated Schiffrin from conglomerate pressure, but
Vitale changed course, an ominous portend. Without Bernstein’s support, these
writers might not have found their audience in the US.
Many on the Pantheon staff resigned. Authors, including Barbara Ehrenreich, Oliver
Sacks, and Kurt Vonnegut, gathered outside Random House headquarters to protest.
It was, they felt, the latest battle in the decades-long war of attrition that was
conglomeration, which they were losing. But senior editors, including Joni Evans
and Sonny Mehta, defended Vitale in the New York Times, asking “why Pantheon
shouldn’t live by the same fiscal rules as the rest of us at Random House and
throughout the industry.”7 The same day, Knopf editor Robin Desser (now vice
president and editorial director) wrote to Scott Walker. “It’s very strange here
without Pantheon — for at present there really is none.”8 She felt ambivalent, caught
between respect for her superiors (“how can Joni and Sonny . . . be wrong?”) and
her sense that “this whole business is disgusting and that actually they were going to
castrate André bit by bit so it is better that he went this way, righteous, with all the
foolish and wonderful connotations righteous implies.”9 The affair was contentious
enough that she ended with the request, “Burn this, will you?”10

113

Against Conglomeration

The demise of Pantheon galvanized literary types to look for alternatives to the
conglomerates, as when Laughlin petitioned the NBCC to look to Graywolf and its
brethren. But the scene was bleak, if less so for poetry, which had migrated to
nonprofits, than for fiction, which the nonprofits, by and large, had yet to take up.
Predecessors to the nonprofits, presses that positioned themselves as the obverse to
behemoths like Random House, struggled through the 1970s and 1980s. Inflation
outpaced wages; books exceeded budgets. New Directions carried on as the
publisher of modernism, bringing out new editions of old works by its mainstays,
Ezra Pound, Tennessee Williams, and William Carlos Williams, along with Jorge
Luis Borges, HD, and Ronald Firbank, while also becoming home to postmodernist
John Hawkes. Laughlin largely rested, this is to say, on his laurels.
Grove, which burned bright in the 50s and 60s, flamed out with the first wave of
conglomeration. Feminists occupied Grove’s offices on April 13, 1970, to protest its
sexism and demand union recognition. The avant-garde publisher used its resistance
to conglomeration as justification for rejecting the union, noting “the wave of
corporate mergers sweeping over the publishing industry and insist[ing] that, insofar
as they ‘have been virtually alone in resisting this trend,’ they should also be
exempted from the unionization efforts that were a response to it.”11 This did not go
over well. In the end, Grove had to downsize dramatically and even then, to survive,
rely on Jason Epstein, the legendary Random House editor, “to prop up the
company.”12 The outsider had to kiss the ring. “Epstein convinced an aging Bennett
Cerf that it would be tragic to let Grove go under, so for much of the 1970s Random
House distributed Grove’s titles, in return for which it received a portion of the
profits.”13 And yet, Grove managed to publish a few important new works in these
decades by novelists including Kathy Acker, Jerzy Kosinski, Leslie Marmon Silko,
and Jeanette Winterson.
Farrar, Straus and Giroux (FSG) held out as an independent publisher until 1993,
publishing postmodern stars including Donald Barthelme, Joan Didion, and Grace
Paley, though Straus considered himself more Epstein’s peer than obverse.
Meanwhile, most leading fiction writers published with conglomerates: Ann Beattie,
Raymond Carver, John Cheever, Toni Morrison, Philip Roth, Anne Tyler, and John
Updike with Random House / Knopf; Saul Bellow, Don DeLillo, and Thomas
Pynchon with Viking.
114

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

The scene was especially bleak for those who were not white men. Even with Toni
Morrison’s advocacy for black writers at Random House, the conglomerates
remained overwhelmingly white. New Directions was almost exclusively white.14
Grove, whose list was notoriously male despite some improvement in these years,
continued to operate with exclusively male upper management and executive
editors.15 By 1990, the radicalism of ethnic studies had been institutionalized as
multiculturalism and the canon wars had been decided largely in favor of expanding
the purview of literary history beyond white men. The conglomerates, along with
New Directions and Grove, were out of step with higher education. Who would
publish the multicultural literature demanded by the moment?
Nonprofits were well-situated, upon Schiffrin’s firing and elevated anxiety about
conglomeration, to take up fiction and to do so while taking advantage of the
industry’s limits and prejudices. As a panelist at the conference of the American
Association of University Professors, Scott Walker predicted, “More and more
serious books won’t be published by the big commercial houses — their publication
will fall to university presses and independent publishers, for whom the 1990s will
be a time of tremendous opportunity.”16
Walker spoke from self-interest, but he was right. Publishers Weekly, covering the
American Booksellers Association’s conference the next summer, reported, “It is as
if, in 1991, a critical mass has been achieved, with the small press section now
crystallized into what in recent years glimmered beneath the bookish surface as a
possibility — a sidelines bazaar — with the main floor, this year commodious if not
exactly airy, a temple to democracy in book publishing.”17
Walker had positioned Graywolf at the forefront of the nonprofit boom. Its budget
had “increased from $257,000 in 1986 to approximately $900,000 in 1991.”18 In a
grant proposal submitted in late 1991, Graywolf claimed, “many current funders of
literature think that in the way the 1960s were in philanthropy the decade of theater,
the 1990s will be the decade of literature.”19 A big part of this growth involved
building lists of literary fiction. Graywolf observed that conglomerates were “cutting
back their fiction and literary publishing programs,” and, as a result, Graywolf had
been receiving “manuscripts from more established authors; from authors who
deliberately choose to be published by a smaller house rather than a more
commercial one; and it is now more possible to acquire books that have stronger
sales potential.”20
115

Against Conglomeration

The timing was such that literary nonprofits without explicit commitments to ethnic
literature, such as Coffee House and Graywolf, found themselves expanding their
fiction lists as demand for ethnic literature was growing among government
bureaucracies and the donor class. At a long-range planning meeting in 1991,
Graywolf staff observed that fiction sales were down in general, but up for ethnic
literature.21 One of the “goals and priorities” that year was to “aggressively broaden
the range of potential funders to Graywolf, by making special efforts on behalf of
books that treat social and educational issues.” 22 Above all, this meant marketing
Multi-Cultural Literacy, an anthology of essays that intervened in the raging canon
wars over what should be taught in high school and college. In August, Graywolf
staff brainstormed “some sort of catchy slogan regarding GW’s crucial role in this
discussion: (i.e. along the lines of: ‘Way before Dinesh D’Souza there was
multiculturalism. Graywolf Press: we are the debate.’)”23 By the end of the year,
Graywolf expanded its mission to note that its “books often help to promote crosscultural and international understanding.”24 This meant they published books by
writers of color and translations.
In a 1995 essay about her internship at Graywolf, Sherry Kempf made this logic
plain. “One book on the fall list that highlights the interaction between marketing
and funding,” she wrote, “is Little by David Treuer.”25 Treuer is a member of Leech
Lake Band of Ojibwe who studied creative writing under Toni Morrison at
Princeton. Little, published in 1995, was his first novel. “This type of project is fairly
new for Graywolf, but it does fulfill the community outreach goals that funders are
looking for right now. The book is written by a person of color whose own
community will be served by the grant.”26 Kempf summed up, “There seems to be a
trade-off: non-profits can afford to take more risks, but in return they are required to
comply with funding guidelines.”27 State and philanthropic money freed Graywolf
from surviving solely on sales and subsidiary rights but made the publisher beholden
to the priorities of its funders, which, in the 1990s, meant, in large part,
multiculturalism.
Allan Kornblum, publisher of Coffee House, was forthright. In 1994, he privately
acknowledged that “Ironically, Coffee House has developed a reputation as a
publisher of Asian American titles without that specific goal in mind. Through our
usual process of selecting books that are diverse or adventurous and represent fine
writing, we have ‘discovered’ or advanced the careers of a number of critically
acclaimed Asian American writers.”28 The next year, Coffee House would present
116

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

itself in a grant proposal as a press that “takes very seriously its commitment to
represent diversity. Over the years we have become known for presenting the voices
of under-represented communities and maintaining high literary standards. We are
one of the premier presenters of work by Asian American writers in the country.”29
The press leveraged its multiculturalism to differentiate itself from the
conglomerates. “Although commercial presses have published some high-profile
books by writers of color, small presses have long championed literary diversity.”30
This was selectively true. The proposal continues, “One year books by African
American writers are the craze in the for-profit sector, another year books by Asian
American writers hit the stands, but small presses stick with their commitment,
providing the public with the full picture of the many cultures that make up
America.”31 This was how an accident became a mission. Nonprofits embraced
multiculturalism less out of principle than convenience.
What did publishers’ unstable mix of motives portend for multiculturalism? The
meaning of multiculturalism was at stake. What would it mean to represent Asian
American, Black, Indian, Latinx stories? Whose voices would be elevated? What
kind of racial visions would result from the constraints that governed access to the
public sphere? Nonprofits purport to operate with a freedom conglomerates lack.
But patronage matters. Nonprofits need to please their funders because they return
again and again to the same monetary well. And in these early years, their funders,
consciously or not, had a vision of what multiculturalism meant to them. Ethnic
literature is no stable thing. Every new book stakes a definitional claim. The sudden
elevation of these literatures by nonprofits in the 1990s meant that a lot of new books
by writers of color were creating the categories to which they were assigned.
What differences are there, if any, between the fiction that writers of color
occasionally sold to market-driven publishers and that which they sold to the
subsidized nonprofits? How did patronage, whether the market’s, the state’s, or the
philanthropist’s, shape these bodies of literature?

3: NEA
The Arts and Humanities Act, which founded the National Endowment for the Arts
in 1965, named as its aim the reinforcement of American hegemony. “The world
leadership which has come to the United States cannot rest solely upon superior
117

Against Conglomeration

power, wealth, and technology, but must be founded upon worldwide respect and
admiration for the nation’s high qualities as a leader in the realm of ideas and of the
spirit.”32 In principle, the US, during the Cold War, claimed to endorse aesthetic
freedom as an extension of individual freedom — its “high qualities” — against
USSR censorship and state-sponsorship of propagandistic art.
Alongside its service as handmaiden to America’s global ambitions, the NEA
served, according to Ralph Ellison, to shore up democracy at home. Ellison was an
original appointee to the National Council on the Arts, the advisory board to the
NEA. He made his case in the introduction to Buying Time: An Anthology
Celebrating 20 Years of the Literature Program of the National Endowment for the
Arts. (The book was edited by Scott Walker and published by Graywolf in 1985, just
as the press was transitioning into a nonprofit with primary support from the NEA.)
Ellison describes the NEA as “a long-deferred answer to questions that had
perplexed the nation’s leaders for close to two hundred years: what role should the
imaginative arts play in the official affairs of a democratic society?” 33 But the
Founding Fathers, in Ellison’s account, weren’t so much perplexed by the question
as hostile to the idea that the arts might have any role at all. He writes that the “likes
of John Adams and Benjamin Franklin” would see the workings of the NEA as a
“drastic reversal” of their sensibilities.34 “For them,” he writes, “the imaginative arts
were an enhancement of monarchic culture that required an educated elite for their
proper appreciation,” which was what the Fathers were trying to escape.35 With the
GI Bill and the postwar economic boom, the number of college-educated Americans
exploded, changing the conditions for the government’s relationship to art: suddenly
the subsidization of art could look more democratic and less aristocratic.
Ellison does not defend the NEA because it provides aesthetic material for the
educated class. He argues that art does the crucial work of lubricating the otherwise
dangerous friction generated by the differences within American society. “By
projecting free-wheeling definitions of the diversity and complexity of American
experience it allows for a more or less peaceful adjustment between the claims of
‘inferiors’ and ‘superiors’ — a function of inestimable value to a society based, as
is ours, upon the abstract ideal of social equality.”36 Ellison celebrates art for its
ability to resolve real inequality with symbolic projections. He makes a political
argument for what Mark McGurl has dubbed “high cultural pluralism,” literature
that unites preoccupations with cultural difference and modernist aesthetics, a boon,
118

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

thinks Ellison, for a nation ostensibly committed to social equality but divided by
racism.37
Immediately upon its founding, the NEA feared that conglomeration threatened
literature’s diversity. As the NEA was getting up and running in the late 1960s, the
publishing industry’s first wave of conglomeration began its work of consolidation.
The “literary ecosystem,” in the words of the NEA’s official history, “was
undergoing significant change.”38 The Endowment understood that it was dedicating
“resources and funds to poets and fiction writers whose works might not survive in
this new mass media climate.”39 For most of its first two decades, the NEA offered
small grants of up to several thousand dollars to writers and literary organizations,
awarding nearly twelve hundred by 1985. In the 1970s, NEA grants were “the only
national funding available to nonprofit literary presses,” helping to pay for “paper,
binding, and operating costs.”40
Beginning in the 1980s, the NEA offered larger “challenge grants,” which
underwrote the rapid expansion of the nonprofits.41 The money was important, but
even more important was how these grants compelled the improvement of business
practices. The founders of the presses were often literary people who loved books
but had little business acumen and muddled through with dodgy finances. As late as
1987, Graywolf — as revealed by an external audit — was tracking costs with cards
for each book, but “not all job cost cards [had] been accumulating expenses on the
same basis.”42 Such chaos was typical.
To apply for a challenge grant, a press had to complete an extensive application,
detailing how it intended to allocate the funds. If awarded, the press had to maintain
an account of how, in fact, the funds were spent and to what end, which instilled
discipline. Coffee House’s Allan Kornblum had to ask, when applying in 1988,
“What is our optimum size...in terms of staff, and number of books to print, and
number of copies of each book? What percent of our budget can we afford for rent,
for marketing?”43 By the end of the 1980s, Jim Sitter, a literary impresario who did
more to establish the nonprofits than anyone, “began leading a concerted advocacy
effort on behalf of literary presses in the private philanthropic community.”44 Two
foundations — Wallace and Andrew W. Mellon—began offering large grants “to
help presses market more effectively (Wallace) and build organizational capacity
(Mellon).”45 Repeated across the nonprofit publishers’ archives is the same gratitude
expressed by Emilie Buchwald, founder of Milkweed Editions: “Funders didn’t give
119

Against Conglomeration

us just money, which was important; they gave us expertise and they left us with
infrastructure.”46
Between 1984 and 1994, Graywolf expanded dramatically. Graywolf won a
challenge grant in 1984 with the backing of the director of the NEA’s Literature
Program, Frank Conroy (who would leave the NEA in 1987 to lead the Iowa Writers’
Workshop). Conroy wrote Walker a letter of recommendation in which he called
Graywolf “a model press, a paradigm” and insisted that, “Graywolf must expand.
Over the next decade the very best of the independent presses must publish the
literary writers whom the conglomerate-dominated commercial publishers can no
longer support.”47 He closed, “Graywolf is the future.”48
Also in 1984, Graywolf became a nonprofit and, soon after, moved from Port
Townsend to Saint Paul to take advantage of Minnesota’s vibrant philanthropic
scene. Walker established “a minimal Board of Directors” — a requirement for
nonprofits — with two members: Raymond Carver, who, by then, was widely
considered the country’s best short story writer; and Jonathan Galassi, a wellrespected editor at Random House who went on to become the president of FSG. 49
Graywolf won Mellon and Wallace grants. Its list and budget grew, but not without
turmoil. From the outside, it appeared to be thriving, but Walker was increasingly
unhappy. For years, he’d been asking James Laughlin how he’d managed to have
success while spending so much time away from New Directions. (Laughlin was
independently wealthy.) In early May, 1991, at the end of another long Minnesota
winter, Walker wrote Laughlin, “I want very much to leave Minnesota, to move into
the Rockies, I need to be nearer mountains. But I don’t want to hurt the press, and a
lot of people close to it are skeptical that I’ll be able to live away from Graywolf and
for things to keep working well. I point to ND as an example of how it can work.”50
But even as it was, things were not working. By early 1994, Graywolf was in serious
financial trouble. In March, the board of directors asked Walker to resign, which he
readily did, acknowledging his managerial struggles. After an extensive search, the
board hired Fiona McCrae. She was a perfect choice. She had experience at Faber
and Faber, a literary commercial publisher, but had grown disillusioned with the forprofit scene and had left her position with the thought of becoming an agent. She
brought not only business sense but invaluable professional networks from east coast
publishing. One of her first acts was to meet the important players in the nonprofit
world, including Gigi Bradford, the current director of the NEA’s Literature
Program. In McCrae’s first letter to the Graywolf community, she reported that, at
120

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

her meeting with Bradford, “the mood was high, with an optimism that the field was
recognizing itself and therefore finally able to become stronger.”51 Succession is a
thorny problem for a small press because the founder’s vision, even his identity, is
profoundly embedded. Graywolf set an early example for how to make it work.
By 1994, after a decade of incubation, nonprofit presses comprised a new formation,
a “field,” built hand-in-hand with the NEA to resist the claustrophobia brought on
by conglomeration. It included countercultural figures like Coffee House’s Allan
Kornblum and Milkweed’s Emilie Buchwald, who got their start with boutique
letterpresses; political and aesthetic activists like Arte Público’s Nicolás Kanellos,
Feminist Press’s Florence Howe, and Dalkey Archive’s John O’Brien; and
expatriates from conglomeration like McCrae and André Schiffrin (who had, by
then, started his own nonprofit, The New Press). Such figures pooled their resources
for the benefit of all.
Two keywords defined the field’s self-understanding: literary and diverse.
Nonprofits used these words to differentiate themselves from commercial presses
and the homogenizing force of conglomeration. This narrative of literature in crisis
was habituated and institutionalized through the perennial documentation required
by state and philanthropic funding. Crisis was good for literature because that made
the mission of the nonprofits — to sustain literature’s otherwise endangered
diversity and literariness — urgent. Conversely, claims to having successfully
implemented multiculturalism gave the impression to readers that the literary world
was more diverse, equal, and democratic than it was. The celebration of Sandra
Cisneros, Louise Erdrich, Toni Morrison, and Amy Tan masked the profound
whiteness of the industry.52
What did this narrative of crisis mean in practice for the nonprofits? It offered an
aesthetic agenda with regard to content — “multiculturalism” — and form —
“literary” style — language they used not only to win grants but, then, to justify
editorial decisions. Yet this narrative opens up further questions, because its terms
are vague. What did it look like when the nonprofits translated the cant from their
grant applications into published literature? What did it mean to be literary and
diverse?

121

Against Conglomeration

4: Modeling Literariness
Nonprofit publishers claim that by escaping the strictures of the market they can
publish writing that is more literary than what the conglomerates issue. Literariness
is a contested category. Some, after the high modernists, New Critics, and
deconstructionists, argue it names the unique style that separates literary from genre
or mass-market fiction.53 Others argue that literariness has more to do with sociology
than with the text itself: that is, literariness resides in the extratextual act of claiming
separation from the demands of the market. Nonprofits perform the latter; the claim
creates its truth in the act of declaring it: literature published by nonprofits becomes,
by definition, literary. But is there truth to the former? Is there anything in the text
that distinguishes nonprofit fiction from that of the conglomerates?
It’s difficult for us to tell. Even if we could read a substantial fraction of the
conglomerate novels published in recent decades — which we can’t — and compare
them to nonprofit novels, we wouldn’t be able to forget the authors or imprints,
muddying our evaluation. What we need is a method that can attempt to distinguish
between conglomerate and nonprofit novels solely on the basis of stylisticfeatures.
Recent developments in computational modeling and machine learning allow for
that: namely the method of text classification via logistic regression, advanced in
literary and cultural studies by Richard Jean So, Ted Underwood, and others.
Supervised learning algorithms work like this. Everyone with email relies on text
classification to separate spam from legitimate emails. Email providers train models
to recognize the difference by giving them emails labeled “spam” and others labeled
“not-spam” and asking the model to learn the features that most reliably distinguish
them, which could include a preponderance of all-caps, or phrases like “free money”
or “get paid.” Those who design the model decide which features it should take into
account, which could be limited to single words, or could include punctuation,
capitalization, phrases, and elements of syntax. They also decide which documents
and how many of them the model will be trained with. They test the model by giving
it unlabeled emails and asking it to distinguish them. If the model can do it accurately
a high percentage of the time, that’s a good spam filter.
We built a model and determined whether it could distinguish between conglomerate
and nonprofit novels. (Technical details are in Appendix A.) On what basis is the
model making its distinctions? What does a novel look like to the model? We trained
122

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

the model to see novels in terms of diction. It searches for which words are used,
and how often. This is a crude approximation of how humans encounter novels. If
the model, on this basis, can’t tell the difference between conglomerate and nonprofit
novels, the result doesn’t prove that there’s no difference between them, just that
there’s no difference that a computer can discern on the basis of diction, or maybe
that the model was too weak because of insufficient or imprecise training data. But
if the computer can tell the difference, all it needs is this approximation to show a
categorical distinction — a distinction that ought to get clearer with more
sophisticated features.
We relied on HathiTrust to construct the conglomerate and nonprofit corpora.
HathiTrust is a digital library that holds millions of volumes from dozens of research
libraries, including volumes under copyright. In September 2018, HathiTrust opened
its collections to scholarly use. We accessed the volumes through a virtual machine
on our computers, performed computational analysis, and exported the results. The
copyrighted volumes remain secure. The nonprofit corpus contains all 191 novels
that Hathi holds from Coffee House, Graywolf, Milkweed, and Mercury House. We
chose these four because they have published continuously across the period, they
define themselves as literary, they publish novels, and they publish authors of
diverse race and gender. The conglomerate corpus contains 606 Random House
novels. We chose Random House because it is the largest trade publisher and has
long served as a primary example against which small presses define themselves.
Both corpora span 1980 to 2007.54
Before we started, we had no idea whether the model would be able to tell the
difference between the two corpora. Based on our experience reading novels from
both categories, it was unclear to us whether they were different in ways detectable
by a machine. The model should, as with a coin flip, be right 50 percent of the time.
It is right about 66 percent of the time. This is not an excellent rate, but it is much
better than random. “Conglomerate” and “nonprofit,” definite categories for a
novel’s provenance, ought to be imprecise as indicators of a novel’s diction. That
our crude model would be enough to accurately predict classes 66 percent of the
time impressed us. If it were much better than this, we would be concerned. Given
the imprecise science of title acquisition, the idiosyncrasy of editorial habits, and the
circulation of staff and authors between conglomerates and nonprofits, we expected
at least some overlap and blurriness.

123

Against Conglomeration

The model shows that conglomerate and nonprofit novels differ at the level of
diction. Is the difference a matter of “literariness”? One affordance of our machine
learning model is that it records the features that most reliably distinguish between
classes. It gives every word a weight that it uses to classify the novels. Here are the
words that most differentiate the categories.

124

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Extensive results are available on GitHub. But a glance is enough to notice the
coherence of the nonprofit features and how they differ from those of the
conglomerates. These are terms of embodiment (shoulders, hands, feet, rhythm,
movement, washing, jumping playing, catch, grab, beat, gesture, break condition,
sweat, swollen, dizzy, hunger, body), craft (fiction, stories, forms, focus, show,
shows, colors, shapes, surface, invisible, portrait), and localism (village, neighbor,
doorway, visited, roads, help, care, provide, tree, forest, roots, planted, fruit, gardens,
pig, chicken, bird, feeding).
The conglomerate features require a bit more interpretation. To be frank, the
categories presented in the image above are just that — an interpretation, open to
contestation by others observing the evidence. As with the nonprofit features, we
have split them into three groups. The first demarcates a world of law (lawyer,
expert, deal, judge, court, law), suspense (murdered, weapons, suspicion, demanded,
horror, risk, danger), and power (affair, deal, champagne, party, waiter, hotel,
airport, confident, ease, beauty, handsome, senior). The second signals bureaucracy
(desk, office, meet, meeting, meetings, message, reports, file, manager, company)
and form, in the sense of order, logic, and pattern (order, reason, rule). The third
names dispositions and mores of polite society (yes, thank, duty, actually, private,
interest, lunch, aware, quietly, welcome, sir, suppose, mood).
We built this model to ask whether nonprofits are, as they claim, more literary than
conglomerates. The results allow us to extend recent computational studies into
literariness and answer yes.
Ted Underwood has shown that fiction differs from nonfiction by its use of “action
verbs,” “body parts,” and “verbs of sensory perception.”55 Andrew Piper, in a
separate study, shows that the “particular nature” of fiction is its commitment to our
“perceptual” engagement with the world, “grounded in an appeal to an embodied
encounter.”56 The divergence between fiction and nonfiction has grown over time.
In the 1700s — the early days of the English-language novel — fiction was closer
to biography, but, across the centuries, they have grown farther apart. After 1980,
nonprofits took responsibility for literature of embodiment, providing continuity
with this several-century trend. Embodiment goes together with pastoral
neighborliness (a world of simple things close to hand: tree, fruit, pig, gardens) and
concern for craft (the foundation of art and experience: forms, color, shapes, surface)
corroborating continuity with the past.
125

Against Conglomeration

Is fictionality the same as literariness? In a broad sense, all fiction is literature and
what marks it as such ought to be named literary. But literariness is also often used
to demarcate literary fiction from genre writing. In this sense, nonprofit fiction, as
opposed to that of conglomerates, is literary because it does not mark itself with a
clear genre signal, but rather doubles down on what is distinct about fiction:
language of embodiment. It even winks at doing this with its attention to craft, not
least fiction and stories themselves. These results lend credence to a definition of
literariness: fiction that emphasizes what distinguishes it as fictional.
The language of conglomerate fiction is different, less about embodiment. It invites
speculation that an autopoietic process is at work in which the conditions of
production, that is to say, conglomeration, make their way into the text itself. And
not just any conditions of conglomeration, but specifically: a kind of bureaucratic
formalism, rule, system, order, office, desk; a results-driven world of ambition and
power, party, hotel, spend, beauty, handsome, champagne, deal, power, hundred,
thousand, million; and the language of correspondence, acquisition, and rejection,
thank, hope, yes, smiled, interest, lunch, decided. We might see these three modes
as allegorizing the processes that one of us has argued elsewhere define the
conglomerate era: rationalization, the bottom line, and the rise of the agent.
There is something science fiction-y about this, as if authorship works at multiple
scales, as if the many minds cooperating within modern bureaucracy to bring a book
to print compose, beyond their will, a collective agency. Maybe even a collective
authorship.57 Conglomeration expresses itself as systematic, nonprofits as fleshy.
Machine, body. Contemporary literature has a dualism.
This — that there’s systemic conglomerate allegorizing and nonprofit literariness —
is a hypothesis. It is the most persuasive interpretation when looking at the evidence
presented by our model. But these are only the most significant words, the influential
tip of an iceberg, and they are dispersed across hundreds of novels and thousands of
contexts. We need to return to close reading to understand what conglomerate form
looks like at the scale of the sentence, the paragraph, the chapter, the novel. And to
answer not only the question what does it mean for nonprofits to be literary, but also,
what does it mean for nonprofits to be diverse?

126

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

5: Close Reading and Race
The fiction lists of Coffee House, Graywolf, and Milkweed are more diverse than
those of the conglomerates in terms of race and gender. Collectively, 70% of the
nonprofit authors are white. 93% of the Random House authors in our corpus are
white. Moreover, white men account for more than half of authors at Random House,
whereas they make up less than a third of authors at the non-profits. But the nonprofit
lists are small enough that one or two writers can account for a big share of the
diversity. As we write, Percival Everett has published nine novels with Graywolf
from its list of ninety-one. Karen Tei Yamashita has published six novels with
Coffee House from its list of one hundred and twenty-two.
As we’ll see, introducing Everett and Yamashita in terms of diversity is misleading.
The writers represented by these statistics — who serve these presses in part as
statistics — resist them through their work.
Sometimes our model correctly recognizes Everett’s and Yamashita’s novels as
nonprofit, other times it misclassifies them as conglomerate. For each novel, the
model gives not only a binary yes or no, but also a percentage along a continuum
between nonprofit and conglomerate. To better see what this means, to gain a sense
of the model’s sensibility, consider that it fiercely and rightly thinks that Michael
Crichton’s Rising Sun, Richard North Pattersons’s Degree of Guilt, and Mario
Puzo’s The Fourth K are conglomerate novels. These are all plot-driven
blockbusters. The model is rightly sure that George Rabasa’s Floating Kingdom,
Lewis (“Scooter”) Libby’s The Apprentice, and David Treuer’s Little are nonprofit
novels. These novels are classically literary.
The model wrongly believes that Brian Evenson’s The Open Curtain, Percival
Everett’s Wounded, and Gilbert Sorrentino’s A Strange Commonplace are
conglomerate novels. It is wrong in the opposite direction about Toni Morrison’s
Beloved, Maxine Hong Kingston’s Tripmaster Monkey, and Michael Ondaatje’s In
the Skin of a Lion, believing them nonprofit.
Each of the novels listed deserves fuller treatment than we can provide here, to be
read through the terms that distinguish between categories.
We will investigate a borderline case. What does it look like when a novel straddles
two classes? The model is uncertain about Everett’s Frenzy. It gives the novel a 66%
127

Against Conglomeration

chance of being published by a non-profit, although that number fails to achieve
statistical significance. Based on variance in the data, our model wouldn’t be
surprised if Frenzy turned out to be published by a conglomerate after all. In fact,
out of four Everett novels in the corpus, Frenzy is the only one the model guesses
correctly, in spite of its low confidence. This is our draw to Frenzy, it is an outlier in
a body of work by an author who troubles the model.
The model’s ambivalence about Everett’s novels is not surprising. We found that the
model’s accuracy (recall) varies across authorial identities. For example, it is
especially good at identifying when a novel by a woman of color was published by
a non-profit. But among novels by Black men, the model is equally good — or rather,
equally ambivalent. Its accuracy on novels by Black men is only 50%, and that is
true for novels in both categories of publisher. In sum, we found that the model’s
chief biases, based on race and gender, are destabilized by novels of Black men
generally, and that Frenzy poses a particular challenge.
The novel is a riff on Greek myths. It begins with the king of Thebes facing a crisis.
Dionysus, god of wine, has wooed the women of Thebes to abandon the city for the
frenzy of the wilderness. The blind prophet Tiresias tells the king, “They have gone
to beat the loose-skinned drum of life and power, leaving your city, shall we say,
male.”58 Or, as Dionysus explains, “These men in power, their eyes see too far and
their hands are too large for close work. Their hands are numb from the counting of
money. That is why these women come to my call. These women have nothing to
count but their fingers.”59 Everett, like our model, genders language of embodiment:
whereas men are alienated from their eyes and hands, women attend to their fingers;
women beat drums. Power tends to signal conglomeration by our model; here it is
what is contested.
Meanwhile, the king’s mentor teaches him Nietzschean philosophy. “Power is
preliminary to all things and preontological”; “you will thank me for a hardness”;
“there is no such thing as misrule as long as you rule.”60 If the wilderness is a site
of feminism, embodiment, and frenzy, then the city is the site of patriarchy, wealth,
and absolute rule.
The bolded words are influential according to our model, indicating nonprofit if
italicized and conglomerate if underlined. Everett has staged a struggle between city
and wilderness, patriarchy and feminism, form and frenzy, wealth and embodiment,
conglomerate and nonprofit. The novel is difficult for the model to identify because
128

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

it enacts the division of the model itself, the division of the contemporary publishing
industry.
The novel bears this out. The binary terms accumulate and expand. The king thinks,
with regard to Dionysus, “this she-boy-god who dances so lightly is only as old as
me, but he will live forever; so much to envy.”61 The king’s mentor complains that,
in the city, “there is no production” and “trade has ceased.”62 He declares, “Reason
is required for the derivation of actions from laws. Out there in that wild, away from
my city, where our women frolic and make sick love, reason has no residence, the
rabble move irrationally, forgetting rules, axioms, and precepts.”63 The city is host
to economics and reason, “untidy and cold,” the narrator tells us, “vacuous and full
of echoes and promises and ambitions and prevarications.”64
Away from the city, in the wilderness, rhythm holds sway: “breathing and song,
rhythmed by the drum”; “the distant drum that fed the rhythm”; “the rhythm of the
drums”; “the endless swaying—I continue to feel the rhythm of it”’; “drummers
among them keeping rhythm.”65 The wilderness is a world of heightened
embodiment, of drunkenness, sex, and violence, of naked dancing, of killing and
eating deer raw.
Everett encourages us to side with Dionysus. The stakes are freedom. Freedom from
money and order and the dispositions of polite society. Freedom to live in one’s
body. Freedom of speech. The king’s mentor brags, “I gave these Greeks their
letters.”66 But so long as the women were bound by the city, they could not properly
speak. By leaving for the wilderness, Tiresias says, they “will rend their tethers and
seek their own voice.”67
Frenzy is an allegory for the plight of the writer in the conglomerate era. To speak
in the city is to be subject to the rationality and instrumentality of capital. To speak
in the wilderness is to submit oneself to the embodiment of frenzy. But the binary,
in Everett’s vision, cannot hold. The leader of the women is tricked into believing
that, in the chaos of drunkenness, she has killed her own son, which convinces her
and the women to quit the frenzy and undergo “a morose, sullen procession back
into the city, a sullen defeat.”68 Embodiment as resistance to capital, Everett
concludes, is futile; nonprofits, too, must submit to capital. The writer must skillfully
navigate between rhythm and reason, embodiment and bureaucracy.

129

Against Conglomeration

Where’s race? Frenzy is, among other things, an allegory for the patriarchy of
publishing. But this was the 90s and multiculturalism was king. And Everett was
Graywolf’s black writer.
Everett addressed race with Erasure, published in 2001 (with the University Press
of New England and, in later editions, with Graywolf) — a direct outgrowth from
how booksellers treated Frenzy. Fiona McCrae, Everett’s editor at Graywolf, writes:
“that a major chain chose to display [Frenzy] only in the African American studies
section surely sowed the seeds of anger that gave rise [to] Erasure.69 Everett was
furious that booksellers pigeonholed him as a black writer with a book that, in his
estimation, had nothing to do with race.
Erasure features Thelonious Ellison, who, like Everett, is a fiction writer and an
English professor in southern California. Ellison describes an encounter with a
literary agent at a party in New York. The agent tells Ellison that he “could sell many
books if [he’d] forget about writing retellings of Euripides and parodies of French
poststructuralists” — both of which Everett has done — “and settle down to write
the true, gritty real stories of black life.”70
Ellison considers dropping his agent because of the agent’s unhappiness with the
fact that Ellison’s work is “not commercial enough to make any real money”71 “The
line is, you’re not black enough,” his agent tells him.72 In need of money to support
his ailing mother, Ellison writes a hyperbolic parody of Richard Wright’s Native Son
and calls it My Pafology, though he later retitles it Fuck. Fuck, written under a
pseudonym, becomes a commercial success, and Erasure concludes with Fuck
winning a major literary award, granted by a committee on which Ellison is a
member, horrified by the depth of his colleagues’ gullibility.
Erasure extends Everett’s critique of authors’ complicity with markets under
conglomeration. In Frenzy, authors navigate between the literariness of embodiment
and allegories of conglomeration; in Erasure, the Scylla and Charybdis are the
expectations placed on writers of color in a time of multiculturalism to represent
their race. One can play the game and submit to stereotypes or refuse and be
conscripted against one’s will. Erasure argues that conglomerates publish books by
black authors that confirm prejudices that readers bring to books by black authors.
It argues that the industry wants books by black authors that already read as black.

130

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Everett portrays a publishing industry in which agents, editors, booksellers,
reviewers, academics, and writers are all complicit in conflating fiction with the
authentic experience of race. Literary markets in the era of conglomeration shaped
what the public understood as blackness according to a liberal multicultural fantasy
of authenticity that sold.
Everett complained about this situation to McCrae a few months after Frenzy came
out, several years before the publication of Erasure. “Sadly, it seems that the
publication of black writers is confined to that material which deals with what the
culture wants to understand as ‘being black.’ It being the case that black writers can
only know, and further only comment on, what it is to be black or non-white. As you
know, my work does not tend toward this.”73 “To hell with markets,” he adds,
squarely placing blame on commercial publishing and, he imagines, signaling his
solidarity with the nonprofit world. But, as the end of Frenzy suggests, he makes the
more sophisticated observation in his fiction that he must abide by certain market
demands, even with nonprofits. “I do not want to feed complacent expectations, but
I do want to be entertaining enough to lure a reader into something new — if not a
new way of thinking, then a new way of reading.”74 Frenzy and Erasure end in defeat
at the hands of markets. But Everett hopes for a negative dialectics: that, in their
negation, the novels will awaken readers to a new consciousness.
Close reading Percival Everett reveals a struggle — embedded in his sentences, his
characters, his plots — between author and institution. Ironically, Everett fails to
recognize that Graywolf and its fellow nonprofits operate according to a parallel
racial logic as the conglomerates, one the image of the other in a funhouse mirror.
He praises Graywolf as exempt because it publishes him, when, for Graywolf, he
serves as an ideal vessel for its own mission of liberal multiculturalism, a prized
commodity for its niche markets. Although it contradicts his stated motives,
Everett’s literary project could be read not to condemn markets, but to condemn
those markets that propagate inauthentic and constraining racial fantasies; the
novels, that is, espouse one more liberal multicultural vision.

6: Multiculturalism and the Market
How has conglomeration shaped multiculturalism? How does the conglomeratenonprofit divide — the mechanical versus the embodied — influence representation
along axes of inequality?
131

Against Conglomeration

Everett gives us one possible, if cynical, answer: that conglomerates, in submission
to the market, publish writers of color who reproduced popular stereotypes. These
writers, Everett argues, are purveyors of internalized racism. In Erasure, this
position belongs to Juanita Mae Jenkins, a young middle-class woman who
graduated from Oberlin before publishing a celebrated novel in black dialect. Everett
has Alice Walker in mind. (“I have never in my life heard someone say, ‘Where fo’
you be going?’,” he said in an interview. “So Alice Walker can kiss my ass.”75) He
blames Oprah. In Erasure, an Oprah figure launches Jenkins to fame. And in that
same interview, he says, “Oprah should stay the fuck out of literature and stop
pretending she knows anything about it.”76
Nonprofits provide the requisite condition for true art. Everett wrote to McCrae,
“What you and Graywolf have done is allowed me the freedom to write as an artist.
To my mind there is nothing more politically significant than for a press to actually
free itself, and therefore the artists it shelters, from the noxious political traps this
culture lays for its ‘writers of color.’”77
Everett’s account rings false. Consider the range of conglomerate multiculturalism,
which includes Sandra Cisneros, Edwidge Danticat, Louise Erdrich, Maxine Hong
Kingston, and Toni Morrison. The politics of market-friendly representations of
people of color cannot be reduced to internalized racism. In a more charitable
moment, Everett acknowledges that Morrison “could write anything down and get it
published because she is going to make somebody some money. It’s also obvious
that she doesn’t do that.”78 Conglomerates compel books to make profits, demanding
market-friendly representations of race, but writers develop strategies to create
aesthetically compelling visions of race within those constraints. Paul Beatty and
Mat Johnson have built careers, over the past few decades, writing satires of racial
discourse in market-friendly styles that sell for conglomerates and dismantle
Everett’s position.
Unlike conglomerates, nonprofits have explicit social missions that guide
acquisition. As such, writers of color comprise a higher percentage of their lists, but,
because they are much smaller than conglomerates, this amounts to relatively few
books. They tend to be critical of mainstream representations of race, in two senses:
they criticize them, and they explore the conditions of their possibility, asking, like
Everett does in Erasure, how is it that we see race as we do? In the essay collection
Native American Fiction, Graywolf-published novelist David Treuer argues, along
similar lines to Everett, against essentialism and stereotypes in American Indian
132

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

literature. Some nonprofit novels depict people of color who evade stereotypes
because they are middle class or culturally refined, such as those of David Haynes,
published by Milkweed, or Clifford’s Blues by John A. Williams, reprinted as part
of Coffee House’s Black Arts Movement series. The title of that series is ironic, as
its books include some that, because they veered away from an essentialism central
to the Black Arts Movement, fit uneasily within it. Other books in the series,
including William Melvin Kelley’s dem and Kristin Lattany’s The Lakestown
Rebellion, similarly embrace non-essentialist depictions of race.79
Karen Tei Yamashita’s work exemplifies the critical tendencies of nonprofit
multicultural fiction. She sent Through the Arc of the Rainforest to Coffee House in
1989. Allan Kornblum reported, “I couldn’t believe I had a novel that exciting sitting
on my lap in manuscript.”80 It became Coffee House’s first hugely successful novel
(by nonprofit standards), selling out a first run of 4000 copies in three weeks. Coffee
House sent Yamashita on the press’s first major author tour. She has gone on to
publish seven books with Coffee House, including the National Book Award finalist,
I Hotel.
Yamashita’s first two novels, Arc and Brazil-Maru, are set in Brazil with Japanese
protagonists. “The centrality of Brazil to Yamashita’s creative work,” Kandice Chuh
writes, “immediately marks its eccentricity to the usual regimes of U.S. American
literature.”81 By the mid 1990s, “Asian Americanist literary discourse ha[d] only
loosely become a home for Yamashita’s work.”82 Critic Rachel Lee felt the need to
attempt a “rapprochement” between Yamashita’s early novels and Asian American
literary studies.83 Arc was published in 1990 and Brazil-Maru in 1992, as the
nonprofit movement was attaining liftoff and multiculturalism was the way forward.
Coffee House wrote to one of its funders that “we have been encouraging Ms.
Yamashita to take up the subject of Asian/Black relations in Los Angeles. We look
forward to publishing this yet-to-be-written re-envisioning of the city of dreams.”84
Such a book would neutralize Yamashita’s eccentric geographical predilections and
situate her securely among multiculturalism.
In 1997, Coffee House published that book, Tropic of Orange. It is, as promised, an
LA novel. It has seven sections, one for each day of the week beginning on the
summer solstice. Each section has seven chapters, one for each protagonist. The cast
includes Asian American, black, and Latinx characters. Yamashita self-consciously
embraces Gabriel García Márquez’s magical realism and LA’s noir tradition from
Raymond Chandler to Walter Mosley. Literary critics have classified the novel as
133

Against Conglomeration

environmental, hemispheric, infrastructural, global, planetary, postmodern, science
fiction, slipstream, technomodernist, and Asian American.
It is also satire. It pays homage to Nathanael West’s acerbic LA satires by namedropping Day of the Locust.85 And one of the principal objects of Yamashita’s satire
is multiculturalism. Emi, an ambitious and irreverent Japanese-American TV
producer and loose avatar for Yamashita, is the character through which this satire
flows. Yamashita introduces Emi by noting that she’s dating her lover “because he
was Latino, part of that hot colorful race,” only to discover that “he wasn’t what you
call the stereotype.”86 As for herself, Emi is “so distant from the Asian female
stereotype — it was questionable if she even had an identity.”87 In case she hasn’t
announced her position clearly enough, Yamashita adds that Emi “liked trying to be
anti-multicultural” around her lover. “Right in the middle of some public place, she
might burst out, ‘Oh you’re so Chicano!’”88 The third section, “WEDNESDAY,” is
subtitled, “Cultural Diversity.” In Emi’s chapter, she makes a scene in a sushi
restaurant. Surveying the diners, she tells her lover, “Here we all are, your
multicultural mosaic.”89 After speculating about the provenance of those in this
mosaic, she declares, “Cultural diversity is bullshit.”90 She asks the sushi chef,
“Don’t you hate being multicultural?” adding, “I hate being multicultural.”91 With
this, Emi provokes the presumably white woman next to her who primly queries,
“Whatever is your problem?” and goes on to defend herself against Emi’s
accusations. “I happen to adore Japanese culture. What can I say? I adore different
cultures. I’ve traveled all over the world. I love living in L.A. because I can find
anything in the world to eat, right here. . . . A true celebration of an international
world.”92
In a novel solicited by Coffee House to satisfy the hunger for multiculturalism,
Yamashita proffers an explicit critique of multiculturalism as — in anticipation of
Everett’s Erasure — reinforcing and profiting from stereotypes packaged as cultural
commodities that appeal to white consumers.93 She rejects liberal multiculturalism
to endorse leftist, anti-globalization politics and radical hospitality toward the
homeless.
The novel culminates in a lucha libre fight on the US-Mexico border between
SUPERNAFTA and the novel’s hero, Arcangel, in the guise of El Gran Mojado,
which translates to The Great Wetback. Arcangel declares “I do not defend my title
for the / rainbow children of the world. / This is not a benefit for UNESCO. / We are
not the world. / This is not a rock concert.”94 Arcangel is not on the side of attempts
134

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

to mollify the inequities of global capitalism through the culture industry (UNESCO,
USA for Africa). Even still, Arcangel’s spectacle of lucha libre is complicit with the
culture industry: “The audience, like life, would go on. . . . Somewhere the profits
from the ticket sales were being divided.”95 Yamashita deflates triumphalism about
the political good of cultural protest. She indicts Coffee House’s embrace of liberal
multiculturalism at the same time that she knowingly acknowledges that her novel
will advance that cause.
Over the next decade, Yamashita went from criticizing multiculturalism to pursuing
its conditions of possibility, the sources from which it came, researching the rise of
ethnic studies and the Yellow Power movement. This entailed a tonal shift toward
earnestness and culminated, in 2010, in the publication of I Hotel, a novel comprised
of ten linked novellas, one for each year between 1968 and 1977.
How she understood her identity changed. “For a while I thought I’d better be a
Japanese American writer, or even a Nikkei writer since that would be the most
accurate description of my background,” she said in 2018, “but now I think of Asian
American as being more appropriate.96 In the Afterword to I Hotel, she presents the
novel as an “offering,” a deeply-researched attempt to understand her predecessors,
“the literary and political movements” that made her career possible.97
She attempts to reconcile a rift between two of the most prominent of those
predecessors, Maxine Hong Kingston and Frank Chin, which is also a rift between
conglomerates and nonprofits. The title of I Hotel’s 1971 novella is Aiiieeeee! Hotel,
which refers to the groundbreaking Aiiieeeee: An Anthology of Asian-American
Writers, published by Howard University Press and edited by Frank Chin among
others. For the expanded 1991 edition, Chin wrote an introduction that indicted
Kingston, a Random House author and one of the most acclaimed and widely-read
Asian American novelists, for pandering to white audiences with her alleged
internalized racism and stereotyped representations. Chin was also an acclaimed
writer whose widely-read novel Donald Duk was published in 1991 with Coffee
House. Chin and Yamashita together propelled Coffee House’s reputation in the
early 1990s as a premier purveyor of Asian American literature — the accident that
Allan Kornblum made a virtue.
Chapter Four of Aiiieeeee! Hotel, “War and Peace,” is a series of sketches of Chin
and Kingston by Sina Grace. Each of the chapter’s seven pages displays a sketch of
him next to a sketch of her. There is no text in the chapter beyond brief captions.
135

Against Conglomeration

They are described progressively as “Son / Daughter,” “Sister / Brother,” “Chinaman
/ Chinawoman,” “Dragon / Dragon,” and “Patriarch / Matriarch.”98
Yamashita positions Chin and Kingston’s dispute as familial (son, daughter, sister,
brother) and the two of them as equals who, together, have shaped Asian American
literature and ought to be treated with the respect owed to elders (patriarch,
matriarch). Amid these portraits, Yamashita and Grace insert sketches of the pair as
characters from the other’s books. Chin is depicted as Wittman Ah Sing, a character
from Kingston’s Tripmaster Monkey possibly based on Chin; and Kingston is
portrayed as Pandora Toy, a character from Chin’s Gunga Din Highway, possibly
based on Kingston in retaliation. Both are thinly veiled attacks. Yamashita captions
these sketches “Fake.”99 On the opposite page, Kingston and Chin are depicted as
autobiographical characters from their own books, Fa Mulan from Kingston’s The
Woman Warrior and Kwan Kung from Chin’s Donald Duk. These are captioned
“Real.”100 Yamashita asks the two to put down their arms, attempting to broker peace
between these major figures of Asian American literature.
Yamashita rejects Chin’s accusation that popular Asian American literature panders
to whites and is racist. But she also embraces Chin, her fellow Coffee House author.
She hopes to move beyond a politics of representation trapped in the terms of
multiculturalism — the politics she had engaged and critiqued in Tropic of Orange.
She settles disputes internal to Asian American literary identity to advance a new
position, which she presents through her depiction of an Asian American Marxist
reading group. The discussants historicize Asian American identity, observing that
they became Asian Americans in 1966 through a process of racialization that they
embraced as a “political designation.”101 The discussion leader says, “you are
organizing around this designation, and that’s useful, but you are going to have to
scrutinize it through a Marxist analysis that includes class.”102 Yamashita’s
ambitious vision, in I Hotel, is to perform, in the tradition of Marxist dialectics,
various syntheses: Kingston and Chin, popular and virtuous, conglomerate and
nonprofit, race and class. She was rewarded by becoming a finalist for the National
Book Award.

136

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

7: Conclusion
In 2008, Zadie Smith imagined “Two Paths for the Novel”: lyrical realism in the
long tradition of Balzac and Flaubert; or avant-garde, along the more recent model
of Barthelme, Gaddis, Pynchon, and Wallace. (She voted for the latter.)
The next year, Mark McGurl published The Program Era, about how creative
writing programs changed American literature. The editors of n+1 responded by
proposing that the two paths for the novel were MFA or NYC: creative writing
programs or New York publishing. MFA: Ann Beattie, Raymond Carver, Stuart
Dybek, Deborah Eisenberg, Denis Johnson. NYC: Jonathan Safran Foer, Jonathan
Franzen, Nicole Krauss, Gary Shteyngart.
Both Smith and n+1 tell partial truths. By missing corporate conglomeration, they
miss the whole. The two paths paved by the period — which subsume and reorient
realism or avant-garde, MFA or NYC — were commercial or nonprofit.
1980 marked the start of this era. Under tremendous financial pressure, commercial
and nonprofit publishers split in their approaches to literariness. Viewed at scale, we
see patterns emerge. The conglomerates produce allegories for themselves.
Language of ambition, bureaucracy, and social mores differentiates conglomerate
books from those of the nonprofits. And the nonprofits double down on what
distinguishes fiction from nonfiction: language of embodiment. We must consider
more than the name on a book’s cover if we want to discern its contents: agents,
editors, and marketers determine the discourse, though they disappear in most
discussions of literature.
But if we zoom in to the scale of a single book, the view changes, returning some
agency to the author. An author has considerable leeway in leveraging the discourse
acceptable to her press. This negotiation between an author and the institution is
almost entirely subliminal for everyone involved, happening at the level of intuition.
Writers of color, who make up a disproportionately small fraction of literary
production, do not align easily along the intersecting axes of conglomeration and
literariness. Works by leading conglomerate writers of color — Sandra Cisneros,
Maxine Hong Kingston, Toni Morrison — are sometimes misclassified by our model
as nonprofit books. Percival Everett’s and Karen Tei Yamashita’s novels are
sometimes misclassified in the other direction. Rather, conglomeration organizes
137

Against Conglomeration

writers of color by how they respond to diversity. Everett and Yamashita, writing for
presses with multicultural missions, make explicit, in their response, their refusal to
play the role of writer of color passively. We have focused in this essay on authorial
strategies of writers of color working with nonprofits. What are the narrative and
stylistic traits of conglomerate diversity? How do Cisneros, Kingston, and Morrison
adapt to the systemic discourses of their conglomerate milieu? These are questions
for further study.
This literary order — organized around conglomeration, literariness, and diversity
— lasted twenty-seven years, from 1980 to 2007. It ended with the financial crisis
and the emergence of Amazon as a major player in publishing.
In 2003, Graywolf broke from the indie distributor that connects small presses across
the US to partner with Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. “It is a step away from the band
of ‘small presses’ and into that virtually empty gap between us and the substantial
independent/literary presses,” McCrae told her staff.103 The move gave Graywolf
more visibility and clout at the cost of resentment from the small press world. It now
occupies that “empty gap.” Another study will need to survey the nonprofit world
after 2007 to tell us how other small presses have reorganized in the age of Amazon
to help shape literature now.

138

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Appendix A
The statistical model used in this paper is one commonly used by Ted Underwood
and others in recent literary scholarship.104
The model is a logistic regression on word frequencies, optimized to predict whether
a novel was published by a nonprofit or conglomerate firm.105 To ensure the model’s
generality, it was regularized using an L2-penalty (C = 0.001) and a restricted
vocabulary (5000 most frequent words); optimal values for regularization were
selected by five-fold cross validation. The model was coded in Python using the
scikit-learn package and implemented in a data capsule made available by the
HathiTrust Research Center.106
Because the accuracy of our model was relatively low (66% f1-score), we took
additional steps to ensure the validity of our findings. The statistical significance of
the model’s accuracy was determined by bootstrap (p < 0.05). Since novels
published by conglomerates greatly outnumber those by nonprofits, the classes were
balanced by downsampling. On average, there were about 140 novels in each
category at training time.
The full code and findings are available at https://github.com/sinykin/nonprofit.

References
1

George Hutchinson, Facing the Abyss (New York: Columbia University Press, 2018), 66.

2

Claire Kirch, “Graywolf Press Celebrates Success,” Publishers Weekly 251, no. 13 (2004).

3

Thomas Whiteside, The Blockbuster Complex (Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 1981).

4

John F. Baker and Calvin Reid, “Pantheon Echoes at NBCC Ceremony,” Publishers Weekly, 237, no. 12 (1990):
13.
5

Ibid.

6

Robert D. McFadden, André Schiffrin, Publishing Force and a Founder of New Press, Is Dead at 78,” New York
Times, December 2, 2013, A31.

139

Against Conglomeration

7

Edwin McDowell, “The Media Business; 40 at Random House Critical of Pantheon,” New York Times, March 13,
1990, D23.
8

Robin Desser to Scott Walker, March 13, 1990,” box 4 Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper Midwest Literary
Archives, University of Minnesota Libraries.
9

Ibid.

10

Ibid.

11

Loren Glass, Counterculture Colophon (Redwood City: Stanford University Press), 204.

12

Ibid, 213.

13

Ibid.

14

Hutchinson, Facing the Abyss, 67-68.

15

Glass, Counterculture Colophon, 208.

16

Gayle Feldman, Chandler B. Grannis, and Daisy Maryles, “AAUP 1990,” Publishers Weekly 237, no. 31 (1990):
18.
17

John Mutter and Maureen O’Brien, “ABA 1991,” Publishers Weekly 238, no. 28 (1991): 19.

18

Lila Wallace Reader’s Digest Fund Proposal, box 3, Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper Midwest Literary
Archives, University of Minnesota Libraries.
19

Ibid.

20

Ibid.

21

“Goals and Priorities, 1991-1992,” box 3, Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper Midwest Literary Archives,
University of Minnesota Libraries.
22

Ibid.

23

8 August 1991 Memo, box 3, Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper Midwest Literary Archives, University of
Minnesota Libraries.
24

Lila Wallace Reader’s Digest Fund Proposal, Graywolf Press Records.

25

Sherry Kempf, “Funding and Publishing: My Experiences with Graywolf Press,” box 5, Graywolf Press Records,
Mss095, Upper Midwest Literary Archives, University of Minnesota Libraries.
26

Ibid.

140

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

27

Ibid.

28

Allan Kornblum, Memos/Notes box 5, Toothpaste/Coffee House Press Records, The University of Iowa
Libraries.
29

Grants, box 4, Toothpaste/Coffee House Press Records, The University of Iowa Libraries.

30

Ibid.

31

Ibid.

32

National Endowment for the Arts: A History, 1965-2008, ed. Mark Bauerlein with Ellen Grantham (Washington:
National Endowment for the Arts, 2008): 18.
33

Ralph Ellison, “Introduction,” Buying Time: An Anthology Celebrating 20 Years of the Literature Program of the
National Endowment for the Arts (Minneapolis: Graywolf Press), xix.
34

Ibid, xx.

35

Ibid, xxiii.

36

Ibid, xxiv.

37

Mark McGurl, The Program Era (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2009), 32.

38

National Endowment, 185.

39

Ibid.

40

“The Emergence of Literary Philanthropy,” Publishers Weekly 244, no. 31 (1997): 44.

41

Ibid.

42

Fraser Carpenter Audit, box 2, Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper Midwest Literary Archives, University of
Minnesota Libraries.
43

Kathleen Norris, “Profile of Coffee House Press,” Poets & Writers (November/December 1992).

44

“Emergence,” 44.

45

Ibid.

46

Joseph Barbato, “The Rise and Fall of the Small Press,” Publishers Weekly 244, no. 31 (1997): 39.

47

Frank Conroy, letter of recommendation for Graywolf Press, box 3, Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper
Midwest Literary Archives.

141

Against Conglomeration

48

Ibid.

49

“Multi-Year Plan for Graywolf Press, 1984 through 1986,” box 1, Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper
Midwest Literary Archives, University of Minnesota Libraries.
50

Scott Walker to James Laughlin, box 4, Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper Midwest Literary Archives,
University of Minnesota Libraries.
51

Fiona McCrae, “Letter to Graywolf Community,” box 4, Graywolf Press Records (Mss095), Upper Midwest
Literary Archives, University of Minnesota Libraries.
52

For more on the whiteness of publishing, see Claire Grossman, Juliana Spahr, and Stephanie Young, “Literature’s
Vexed Democratization,” American Literary History (forthcoming); Laura McGrath, “Comping White,” Los
Angeles Review of Books, January 21, 2019; Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu, “Race, Writing, and
Computation: Racial Difference and the US Novel, 1880-2000,” Cultural Analytics, January 11, 2019; Richard Jean
So and Edwin Roland, “Race and Distant Reading,” PMLA 135, no. 1 (January 2020): 59-73.
53

Derek Attridge, The Singularity of Literature (New York: Routledge, 2004).

54

Hathi’s holdings are selective, containing those novels acquired by university libraries. We are working with
Hathi to assess the histories of transmission that led to its holdings and, following protocols advanced by Katherine
Bode, our findings are incomplete until we understand how the corporas’ omissions shape our results. See Katherine
Bode, A World of Fiction (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2018).
55

Ted Underwood, Distant Horizons (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2019), 25.

56

Andrew Piper, Enumerations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2018), 99-100.

57

In The Studios after the Studios and Hollywood Math and Aftermath, J. D. Connor writes about corporate selfallegorizing in film, as does Jerome Christensen in a series of essays, including “The Time Warner Conspiracy:
JFK, Batman, and the Manager Theory of Hollywood Film,” Critical Inquiry 28, no. 3 (Spring 2002): 591–617.
Also see Sarah Brouillette, Literature and the Creative Economy (Redwood City: Stanford University Press, 2014)
and Michael Szalay, “The Incorporation Artist” Los Angeles Review of Books, July 10, 2012. In Making Literature
Now, Amy Hungerford illuminates the quotidian efforts of the many minds whose labor is required for any novel’s
publication. Amy Hungerford, Making Literature Now (Redwood City: Stanford University Press, 2016).
58

Percival Everett, Frenzy (Minneapolis: Graywolf Press, 1997), 4.

59

Ibid, 18.

60

Ibid, 24–25.

61

Ibid, 27.

62

Ibid, 49, 72.

63

Ibid, 124.

142

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

64

Ibid, 157.

65

Ibid, 2, 97, 110, 148, 154.

66

Ibid, 50.

67

Ibid, 118.

68

Ibid, 163.

69

Fiona McCrae, “Frenzy,” Callaloo 28, no. 2 (2005): 329.

70

Percival Everett, Erasure (Minneapolis: Graywolf Press, 2011), 4.

71

Ibid, 48.

72

Ibid, 43.

73

Percival Everett to Fiona McCrae, 27 March 1997, box 5, Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper Midwest
Literary Archives, University of Minnesota Libraries.
74

Ibid.

75

Rone Shavers, “Percival Everett,” Conversations with Percival Everett (Jackson: University of Mississippi Press,
2013), 49.
76

Ibid.

77

Everett to Fiona, Graywolf Press Records.

78

Robert Birnbaum, “Author Interview: Percival Everett,” Identity Theory (6 May 2003).

79

Kinohi Nishikawa writes that, despite its “innovation,” “there is scant recognition among critics that a veritable
school of black postmodern satire flourished during the late 1960s and early 1970s.” He argues that writers like
Kelley and Fran Ross disappeared from literary history because they did not adopt the aesthetics and politics of the
Black Arts Movement. Kinohi Nishikawa, “The Book Reads You: William Melvin Kelley’s Typographic
Imagination,” American Literary History 30, no. 4 (2018): 732–733.
80

Michael Coffey, “Growing Up Small Press,” Publishers Weekly (1 November 2010).

81

Kandice Chuh, “Of Hemispheres and Other Spheres: Navigating Karen Tei Yamashita’s Literary World,”
American Literary History 18, no. 3 (Autumn 2006): 620.
82
83

Ibid.

Rachel Lee, “Asian American Cultural Production in Asia-Pacific Perspective,” boundary 2 26, no. 2 (Summer
143
1999): 233.

Against Conglomeration

84

“Grants,” Toothpaste/Coffee House Press Records.

85

Karen Tei Yamashita, Tropic of Orange (Minneapolis: Coffee House Press, 1997), 140.

86

Ibid, 20.

87

Ibid.

88

Ibid, 21.

89

Ibid, 110.

90

Ibid, 111.

91

Ibid.

92

Ibid.

93

James Kyung-Jin Lee writes that Yamashita critiques “an abstract notion of cultural difference that always
demands the sameness produced by the silencing of stories of violence and exclusion. As such, an embrace of
multiculturalism would be Asian America’s ultimate undoing, as our allegiance to ignore the suffering of others
inevitably prevents us from confronting the suffering within” (249). James Kyung-Jin Lee, “Multiculturalism,”
Keywords for Asian American Studies, eds. Cathy J. Schlund-Vials, Linda Trinh Võ, K. Scott Wong (New York:
NYU Press, 2015).
94

Yamashita, Tropic, 222.

95

Ibid, 225.

96

A. Robert Lee, “Speaking Craft: An Interview with Karen Tei Yamashita,” Karen Tei Yamashita: Fictions of
Magic and Memory, ed. A. Robert Lee (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2018), 179.
97

Karen Tei Yamashita, I Hotel (Minneapolis: Coffee House Press, 2010), 620.

98

Ibid, 244-245, 248-250.

99

Ibid, 246.

100

Ibid, 247.

101

Ibid, 321.

102

Ibid.

103

FSG-misc, 2002-2004, box 5, Graywolf Press Records, Mss095, Upper Midwest Literary Archives, University
of Minnesota Libraries.

144

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

104

In particular we closely follow: Ted Underwood and Jordan Sellers, “The Longue Durée of Literary Prestige,”
MLQ 77, no. 3 (September 2016): 321-344; Richard Jean So and Edwin Roland, “Race and Distant Reading,” PMLA
135, no. 1 (January 2020): 59-73.
105

Ted Underwood provides an extensive account of logistic regression for predictive modeling of texts in
“Appendix B,” Distant Horizons (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2019).
106

Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research 12 (2011):
2825-2830.

145

