Journal of
Cultural Analytics

April 20, 2021

Feminist Bestsellers: A Digital History of
1970s Feminism
Michelle Moravec and Kent K. Chang
Michelle Moravec, Rosemont College
Kent K. Chang, University of California, Berkeley
Peer-Reviewer: Ian Milligan
Data Repository: 10.7910/DVN/K1OANO

ABSTRACT
Feminism of the 1970s remains among the most influential social movements within the United States.
Bestselling texts played a crucial role in spreading feminism beyond early activists into the mainstream of
American society. Contemporary scholars of feminism continue to rely on these works as pivotal historical
sources. This paper utilizes quantitative methods to compare six feminist bestsellers from 1970. Our data
consists of three subcorpora of digitized books published in 1970 found in the Hathi Trust: six feminist
bestsellers, a sample of non-fiction, and a sample of writing about women. Computational textual analysis
identifies each bestselling title's salient features and the contributions each text made at this key moment in
the development of feminist thought. These results led us to propose a historiographical intervention that
credits one bestseller, The Black Woman, with a more prominent role in the development of 1970s feminism.

Academics have long recognized 1970 as a signal moment in feminism’s history. In
the US, it has been labeled “Feminism’s Pivotal Year” when a “wave of press
attention” moved women’s liberation into the mainstream.”1 Histories of Black
feminism also date “the beginning of a clearly defined Black women’s liberation
movement” to 1970.2 In Britain and Australia, the year serves as the origin point of
the women’s movement.3 The year 1970, however, functions as more than a
temporal marker. As Lisa Disch noted in a special issue devoted to 1970s feminisms,
the year, conceived “as an adjective rather than an epoch,” connotes an ideological
position: “politically naive, . . . essentialist in its aspiration toward (straight, white,
middle-class) ‘sisterhood’ and unselfconsciously exclusionary.”4
From the vantage point of fifty years later, this essay offers a historiographical
intervention into 1970s feminism through computational text analysis of six
bestsellers from the first year of the decade.5 Today these storied texts are among
the most read and taught works of feminism. Inclusion among considerations of “the
books that made us feminists” offers still another indication of their canonical status,
yet scholars have tended to discuss some of these titles more than others, reflecting
deeply-seated historiographical viewpoints about feminism during the 1970s.6 By
employing a new methodology to analyze these texts, we hope to unsettle
Journal of Cultural Analytics 4 (2021): 48-74. doi: 10.22148/001c.22333

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

conventional scholarly conclusions about them. After an overview of the six books,
we provide a brief review of scholarship about 1970s feminism and introduce our
approach drawn from the digital humanities.
The press tended to treat these texts as representative of the same phenomenon, the
emerging feminist movement.7 However, they encountered varying levels of critical
and commercial successes. In July of 1970, a dissertation by a doctoral candidate in
literature at Columbia University became an overnight bestseller.8 Kate
Millett’s Sexual Politics: A Surprising Examination of Society’s Most Arbitrary
Folly, presented the "sexual mythos of our era ... which must be explored if any
radical social change is to come.”9 The next month, British novelist Eva
Figes’s Patriarchal Attitudes, addressing “the factors which have helped place
women in subservient roles in most societies,” received a more modest reception and
was all but eclipsed by The Female Eunuch in September.”10 Australian Germaine
Greer’s text described “the castration of women . . . carried out in terms of a
masculine-feminine polarity.”11 It appeared just as Sexual Politics entered the New
York Times bestseller list, a feat it would equal and then surpass by attaining the
number one spot.12 Shulamith Firestone’s The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for
Feminist Revolution decried “the division of society into two distinct biological
classes for procreative reproduction and the struggles of these classes with one
another.”13 By the time it appeared in print in October, the author had withdrawn
from public life, and the book never attained the sales success of Millett’s or
Greer’s.14
In addition to these four monographs, two influential anthologies also made their
debuts in 1970. Toni Cade Bambara conceived of The Black Woman: An
Anthology as a mass-market paperback; the smaller, cheaply produced editions
available at many retail outlets for around a dollar.15 Cade prioritized access over the
prestige of hardback to get the “collection of poems, stories, essays . . .[that] reflect
the preoccupations of the contemporary Black woman in this country” into as many
hands as possible, proving that a market for Black women’s writing existed.16 She
succeeded. The Black Woman had a run of at least 200,000, going to a second
printing within a month of its August 1970 publication.17 Similarly, to increase
access, Robin Morgan negotiated a simultaneous hardback and paperback release in
September of 1970 for Sisterhood is Powerful: Writings from Women’s Liberation,
“a sort of introduction to the movement . . . but told in our own words.”18
In contemporary scholarship, descriptions like “classics of 1970s feminism” provide
a convenient shorthand for referring to these foundational works. Yet the term
“1970s feminism” is a scholarly invention. As Clare Hemmings persuasively

49

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

demonstrates in Telling Feminist Stories, this periodization creates lasting
historiographical narratives. Whether positioned as the good old days or the
backwards past, invocations of 1970s feminism rely on sweeping generalizations
which invariably occlude complexities.19 Hemmings’ conclusion that narratives of
1970s feminism erase women of color has particular relevance for this study.
Other scholars anticipated Hemings's description of this phenomenon. Janet R.
Jakobsen observes that “repeated reference to the 1980s as the beginning of diversity
produces a number of narrative implications,” pointing specifically to the erasure
of The Black Woman’s significance.20 Chela Sandoval, discussing “1970s feminist
theory,” documents the ways “hegemonic feminism of the 1980s” appropriated
women of color’s theorizing.21 Many of these scholars note that the usage of
temporal markers plays into these narrativizing tendencies. Lisa Marie Hogeland,
for example, recognizes the exclusion of “enormous and important contributions of
women of color in the 1970s.”22 Astrid Henry similarly concludes that wave
metaphors “enable younger feminists to present their new wave as more progressive
and inclusive.”23
Subsequent scholars have amplified Hemmings’ conclusion. Victoria Browne
critiques the linear, teleological, and totalizing models of feminist history.”24 Among
the blockbusters of 1970 considered in this article, she focuses on Firestone and
Millett. Activist-centered studies have complicated this version of feminism’s
history, challenging the notion that a hegemonic 1970s feminism existed outside
academia. Kristen Hogan’s oral history interviews with participants in the feminist
bookstore movement did not recall “1970s feminism as straight and white."25 Maria
Cotera notes that by focusing on academics, histories of 1970s feminism create a
“lost generation” of Chicana feminism that, like Black feminism, emerged and
developed not outside the academy but alongside it.26 Teresse Jonsson’s analysis of
accounts by British women’s liberationists illustrates how “anti-racist critiques
which were made in the past (and continue to be made) must be erased from the
narrative” to support dominant periodizations of 1970s feminism.27 Jennifer Nash’s
recent work points out that historical narratives of 1970s feminism inevitably reduce
Black feminism to two functions: disciplining feminism or saving it.28 As Kathi
Weeks has suggested, however, “standard critiques of 1970s feminism” have settled
into “orthodoxies of their own.”29 She postulates that feminism’s histories require
temporalities that remake the past rather than merely remembering it.
Our goal is precisely that — to remake histories of 1970s feminism by emphasizing
the signal year and the importance of Bambara’s text in relation to more frequently
recognized feminist literature from this era.30 As Benita Roth notes, The Black

50

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Woman “is rarely treated by scholars as a product of feminist social movement
activism,” and, as we illustrate below, it rarely receives the same acknowledgment
in broader discussions of the achievements of feminists.31

Titles

word count

feminist corpus

6

771,403

women corpus

142

1,0450,760

sample corpus

300

3,410,9453

Sisterhood is Powerful

204,160

Sexual Politics

191,566

The Female Eunuch

122,145

The Black Woman

99,156

The Dialectic of Sex

84,678

Patriarchal Attitudes

69,698

Table 1. Corpus overview.
Our method for analyzing feminist bestsellers from 1970 draws on the digital
humanities. This essay is not the first to apply such an approach to bestsellers, but
our goal is not to reveal the core features of such works. Instead, we answer specific
historical questions using a small, albeit highly influential, set of nonfiction feminist
bestsellers. Small corpora are unusual in the digital humanities, but in this case, the
research question makes them appropriate. The corpus of feminist bestsellers is
juxtaposed again two contemporaneous reference corpora: a sample of general
nonfiction and a corpus of nonfiction writing about women drawn from the
HathiTrust (Table 1).32 This database contained a potential pool of over 40,000
English-language books published in 1970. Further limiting this list to titles put out
51

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

by the six large publishers of the era and their subsidiaries resulted in just over 1,500
works.33 We hand eliminated any book that appeared to be fictional or about women
based on its title, resulting in a potential pool of 1,023 books, of which 300 were
sampled. We label this the sample corpus. Any title that appeared to be writing about
women was reserved for the second corpus, referred to as the women corpus.
We then derive the following information about the corpora using the HathiTrust
Data Capsule.34 For named entity recognition, we used the 3-class model of Stanford
NER to generate the labels.35 To assist the analysis process, we used two Python
scripts. Results for n-gram frequencies, lists of keywords, and collocates of specific
interested words, those selected by the researcher, used in this paper were produced
with AntConc in the HathiTrust Data Capsule.36 Tokens are separated by space.
Keyness is measured by log-likelihood ratio.37 Collocation analysis focuses on
selected interested words (social, change, marriage, family, love, political, and
revolution), and collocates are defined as words that co-occur within a 10-word
context window (five to the left of the word, and five to the right), and those with
higher association strengths, measured by mutual information, are especially
considered.38
The following analysis relies on two comparisons of the corpora. Each of the three
corpora is compared to the other two. This analysis relies solely on results produced
in the HathiTrust Research Capsule and the results offer the broadest comparison
among the texts, helping to contextualize feminist authors’ arguments against
contemporary concerns. To tease out what distinguishes feminist texts’ treatment of
women from other works of 1970, interested terms from the feminist corpus are
compared individually to their presence in the other two corpora, as in the feminist
corpus to the women corpus or the feminist corpus to the sample corpus. These
calculations were performed manually using the contingency tables produced in the
HathiTrust Data Capsule.39 Results include log ratios, a simple measurement that
allows normalized usages of individual words to be compared across the corpora.40
While computational analysis in the humanities is often justified by the large number
of texts, we use the method here for other reasons. This approach may circumvent
the tendency to see only those text features that conform to existing historiographical
assumptions. Computational analysis does things quite efficiently that the human
mind cannot. In this case, computer software calculated mathematical relationships
between words. While one could feasibly count the number of times a name appears,
computational text analysis does more than count. Collocation strength, for example
— the likelihood of words to follow particular patterns of association — would be
quite complicated to determine manually.

52

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

The use of the data capsule in the HathiTrust offers both benefits and limitations.
The process of non-consumptive text analysis means that the entire texts are not
made available for researchers to download to their machines, and instead they are
asked to implement their own analysis in a remote desktop setting. The benefits
include access to a very large body of machine-readable texts without violating
copyright restrictions. The limitations include inability to verify optical character
recognition (OCR) quality for the individual texts that may skew results. Because
books are scanned in their entirety, when OCR’d texts are not further cleaned, results
include analysis of words that appear in front and back matter as well as chapter
headings, all of which influences calculations based on total word counts.
Although it is obvious, we want to emphasize that data sets are subject to
interpretation, and we freely confess that what follows is not a disinterested reading.
The purpose of this article is to contribute to the ongoing effort by scholars to recenter Black women in the historiography of feminism. Although authors might shy
away from the statement made by one historian that “Black feminism developed
later than white feminism,” too much scholarship still relies on chronologies that
reinforce that impression.41 Along with Benita Roth and many other scholars, we
conclude that “Black feminism began when second-wave white feminism began. It
was part and parcel of it.”42 Shifting the criteria for what counts as feminism from
formal organizing to theorizing, as Kimberly Springer suggests, makes it clear that
Black feminists participated in the development of feminist ideas now widely
credited to white feminists active in the later 1960s and early 1970s.43 By extension,
this essay positions The Black Woman as an integral part of feminism in the 1970s.44
In each of the three sections that follow, we compare the corpora to highlight what
is distinctive about the feminist bestsellers. We anchor these discussions in relevant
historiography and then move to close readings of the six bestsellers. These iconic
texts are some of the most studied works in 1970s feminism, and the idea that a
digital humanities approach alone would reveal new and unexpected interpretations
is an unrealistic relic of the novelty factor that continues to inhere to digital
humanities. Instead, data guides particular juxtapositions to suggest how The Black
Woman should be more extensively incorporated into histories of 1970s feminism.

Feminism and Freudian Experts
Corpus analysis highlights that feminist bestsellers disputed the prevalent
assumption that psychology offered particularly relevant insights into contemporary
issues. The centrality of psychology in the sample corpus, compared to the combined
women and feminist corpus, reflects the prominence of “psychological experts

53

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

[who] decisively shaped Americans’ understanding of what significant public issues
were and what should be done about them.”45 The reliance on Freudian theories
particularly angered many feminists, as reflected in keywords from this corpus,
including Freudian, Freudianism, and Oedipal. Entity results further confirm
Freud's centrality; he is the first or second most-mentioned person in the feminist
corpus.46
When separating the corpora, these distinctions become even more apparent. While
the sample corpus is more likely than the woman corpus to
include psychoanalysis and psychology (a two-fold difference for both), the feminist
corpus is two times more likely than the sample to use psychology and almost eight
times more likely to use psychoanalysis.47 This finding is consistent with how the
literature depicts them. A 1990s overview of feminism and psychoanalysis credits
authors of the four bestselling monographs of 1970 as the “first to fault Freud in the
name of feminism.” A monograph on Freud’s critics repeats this interpretation
almost 20 years later: “The year 1970 itself was particularly rough, when, in separate
books, Kate Millett, Germaine Greer, Shulamith Firestone, and Eva Figes all
took Freud to task for his reactionary views on women.” That 1990s text addresses
Black matriarchy, without references to Black women's writings, in a chapter on
1950s momism. Black feminists instead appear, through works published in 1970
and 1971, as precursors to Nancy Chodorow’s 1979 efforts to rescue motherhood
from Freud: “Angela Davis and Patricia M. Robinson provided a new narrative of
African American history to accentuate the significance of matrifocal factors.”
Corpus analysis suggests two ways writings in The Black Woman might better fit
into this history. Contributors confronted experts and countered Freudian-inspired
critiques of the Black family.
As Figes notes in her introduction, “thousands of books have been written about
women,” most of them reflecting male authors’ “bias,” “arrogance,” and
“ignorance.”48 Still, Freudian influences were too strong to be ignored. As feminists
attempted to dethrone Freudian thought, they relied on other experts. Both Millett
and Greer mention the anthropologist Malinowski to contravene Freud’s patriarchal
family model, but he receives the most extensive treatment in Figes, who places him
in an imagined debate with Freud: “Everyone has to work their way through the
Oedipal situation, declares Freud. Pardon me, answers Malinowski, but in the place
where I work, families do not recognize the father figure, so the situation simply
never arises in the first place. Exit Freud.”49 Authors also cited the work of
contemporary psychiatrists who criticized the Freudian familial sexual drama.
Firestone cites Andrew Salter’s The Case Against Psychoanalysis (1952) in her
takedown of the Oedipal complex.50 Sexual Politics, The Female Eunuch, The

54

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Dialectic of Sex, and Sisterhood is Powerful all rely on psychiatrist Robert Stoller’s
1968 Sex and Gender On the Development of Masculinity and Femininity to
contradict Freudian theories of normative gender.51
Black women, even more than white feminists, felt the strictures of “the ideal woman
of expert discourse,” which so often drew on Freudianism.52 There is a statistically
significant difference in the usage of experts between authors in The Black
Woman and other authors. They were eight times more likely to use experts than
Millett and four times more likely than Firestone.53 Bambara’s preface methodically
demonstrates that all the “experts” are “men, Black or White” and “white women.”54
She derides “psychiatrists and the like” who collect “data . . . to reinforce rather than
challenge societal expectations” and “breezily build their theories of
masculine/feminine.”55
Bambara’s disdain for psychiatry did not translate into an extensive discussion of
Freud by the contributors to her volume. Freud appears by name only twice,
mentioned both times by Bambara.56 From the perspective of computational text
analysis, literature that ignores The Black Woman in discussions of feminist
critiques of Freud may appear justified. However, from a more fundamental
perspective, that would be an error. The writers may not have disputed key Freudian
concepts in the same way that Millett zeroed in on penis envy, Figes on castration
complex, or Firestone on Oedipal complex, all bigrams found in their books. But the
results of computational analysis indicate where they aimed their critique: at the
Freudian ideas embodied in the Moynihan Report. Moynihan is key to the feminist
corpus (having almost an eightfold difference from the sample corpus and more than
a thirty-twofold difference from the women corpus).57 Outside of the The Black
Woman, only Sisterhood is Powerful and Dialectic of Sex name him.58
Authors in The Black Woman addressed Freud through a surrogate popularizer.
Entity recognition results indicate Moynihan is the fourth most mentioned nonfictional person in the anthology. Daniel Patrick Moynihan’s Department of Labor
report on “The Negro Family” offered a damning indictment of its “matriarchal
structure.” Moynihan drew on “psychoanalytic theory” and quoted extensively from
psychologists’ studies.59 As Laura Dawkins has observed, the report betrayed an
“implicitly Freudian basis” through the “equation of patriarchy and social
progress.”60 The ensuing public controversy around the report further amplified its
Freudian aspects as “many commentators, Black and white, viewed Moynihan
through a Freudian lens of sexual psychodrama.61
Bambara names “setting the record straight on the matriarch” as one of her anthology
goals, and Keira V. Williams estimates that fully half the essays addressed
55

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

Moynihan’s stereotype.62 While Adele Jones rejects Moynihan’s conclusions out of
hand as “White sociological bullshit to shift the blame from the white system to the
Black woman,” other authors relied on different strategies to refute his conclusions.63
Bond and Peery question his quantitative evidence, the rather unimpressive “statistic
that one-quarter — only one-quarter! — of all Black families are headed by
women.”64 Patricia Murphy Robinson, writing on behalf of her Group, offers crosscultural examples to question the universality of gendered family dynamics: “In the
Kalahari Desert in Southwest Africa . . . there is no strong matriarchal or patriarchal
emphasis.65 Frances Beal quotes Sojourner Truth in support of her contention that
the “middle-class white model” of femininity never applied to Black women.66
Although the experts they invoked may have differed from those cited by Figes,
Firestone, Greer, and Millett, authors in The Black Woman engaged in the same
process to dispute the Freudian conclusions of the Moynihan report.67
In addition to these direct challenges to Moynihan, authors in The Black
Woman addressed
coded
references
to
his
analysis.
Terms
like matriarch and emasculated, all key in The Black Woman, reflect an
immediately recognizable “dog whistle” politics that emerged around the Moynihan
report.68 Moynihan’s unquestioning acceptance that “males are dominant in family
relationships” led him to update the old stereotype of the Black “matriarch” to
describe a familial structure that “reversed [the] roles of husband and wife.”69 Bond
and Peery contend that “the Black matriarch was a kind of folk character largely
fashioned by whites.” Toni Cade Bambara concurs, encouraging Blacks to “reject .
. . the opinions of outside ‘experts’ who love to explain ourselves to ourselves,
telling the Black man that the matriarch is his enemy,” an unnamed but completely
intelligible reference to Moynihan.70
Essays in The Black Woman also took on the misrepresentation that Black women
contributed to or benefited from Black men being emasculated.71 In Moynihan’s
recasting of the psychosexual drama, Black women replaced the castrating father in
a “matriarchal structure [that] . . . imposes a crushing burden on the Negro male”
and only secondarily on “a great many Negro women as well.”72 Beal notes that “our
husbands, fathers, brothers, and sons have been emasculated,” but denies that black
women share the blame: “it is a gross distortion of fact to state that Black women
have oppressed Black men.”73 Black women also argued against the idea that they
were beneficiaries of this disempowerment. Abbey Lincoln acknowledges that black
men have been “emasculated,” but points out this does not prove “the propaganda
that the only free people in this country are the white man and the Black woman.”

56

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Instead, in one of the most significant theoretical formulations of 1970s feminism,
authors re-positioned Black women as embedded in multiple structures of
oppression, rather than a single gender-based one. Beal’s formulation of the “double
jeopardy” that results from being both Black and female is echoed by Kay Lindsey’s
contention that “Black women are penalized on two counts” and Bond and Peery’s
assertion that “Black women are victimized on two counts: they are women, and
they are Black”74 By emphasizing Black women’s particular status, authors refuted
Moynihan’s implication that Black men bore the more significant burdens of racism
due to their frustrated masculinity.
The Black Woman’s theorizing about women’s role in the family, the power
dynamics of gender, and the restrictions of prescriptive femininity occurred
alongside that by white feminists. The works discussed in The Black Woman date
from 1966 to 1969, the same timeframe in which white feminists, whose writings
are more often cited, developed their ideas.75 Furthermore, they belonged to the same
evolving discourse. As Benita Roth indicates, “black feminist writing was being
produced and read by both black and white women."76 Robin Morgan solicited work
by Frances Beal for Sisterhood is Powerful and reprinted work by Patricia Robinson
and her group that had appeared originally in the women’s liberation journal Lilith.77
Computational text analysis highlights Black women’s greater challenge
to experts expressed most forcefully in their refutation of the Moynihan Report’s
depiction of the matriarch and emasculated men. This evidence places them, at a
much earlier period, in a vital part of the story of feminism’s engagement with
Freudian thought.

Feminism and Love
If comparison with the sample corpus stresses feminist opposition to Freudian
psychology, then comparison to the women corpus reveals yet another distinctive
dimension of the feminist corpus. The women corpus contains highly ranked key
terms such as marriage and family. As Allison Lefkowitz observed, “a broad array
of Americans identified marriage as a problem in the 1960s and 1970s,” while
another scholar dates the origins of “the war over the family” to this era, beginning
with the debate surrounding the Moynihan report that was quickly joined by “radical
feminists . . . gays and lesbians . . . divorced people . . . [and] unwed mothers.”78
Computational text analysis hints at both commonalities and divergences in this
content across the corpora. The feminist corpus overlaps with the sample corpus in
terms of the nuclear family as the most frequent family trigram. However, while the
sample and women corpus share marriage’s trigram marriage and family, the

57

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

feminist corpus shifts this to love and marriage. Comparing the corpora individually
clarifies that a sustained interest in love is distinctive to the feminist corpus. While
the feminist and women corpora show effect size divergences from the sample
corpus in family, marriage, and love, the feminist corpus uses love twice as much as
the women corpus.79 Collocations suggest a different context around love in the
corpora. The sample corpus includes religious love, not just romantic love. Love is
an ideal and a myth in the feminist corpus, while collocates such as glorious,
ecstasy, sweetest in the women corpus indicate more positive connotations.
Feminists’ hostility towards love has not gone unremarked upon. In the late 1990s,
one scholar placed Millett, Firestone, and Greer within a tradition that “identifies a
direct relationship between the practice of love and the reproduction of patriarchal
power.” A strikingly similar analysis, pointing to the same three authors, appeared
nearly 20 years later: “In the 1970s feminists condemned romantic love . . . they
opposed and ridiculed romance because it led to domestic oppression for women.”
Love is the third most key word in The Female Eunuch; it provides one of four
governing concepts in Greer’s text.80 In various chapters, she explores a wide range
of subjects from the platonic ideal to the love object. The chapter on “The MiddleClass Myth of Love and Marriage” is representative of her approach. It begins with
Feudal literature and proceeds through the 18th-century novel. Only in the final few
pages does she touch on the contemporary era. On the other hand, ad copy for The
Dialectic of Sex, the title with the second most frequent use of love, promised that
“the chapter on love will change your life!” — and Firestone did not disappoint.81
She proclaims, “love . . . is the pivot of women’s oppression today” and suggests
that women might have “to get rid of love.”82 For Firestone, romantic love is “love
corrupted by its power context.”83 On this point, Millett concurs. Love is “emotional
manipulation” that blinds women to their oppression.84
But what of The Black Woman? As a recent history, Black Women, Black Love:
America's War on African American Marriage, clarifies, Black romantic
relationships were framed not by feudal practice, but by those of the federal
government.85 Not only did the Moynihan Report depict “Black romantic
relationships and sexuality . . . as pathological,” but racism created “crippling
structural
disparities”
that
impeded
them.86 The
Black
Woman contains family, marriage, and love at the lowest rates, but does that justify
its authors’ exclusion from feminist theorizing about these subjects? Visualizing the
intersection of names extracted from the six feminist texts offered hints as to where
the anthology fits into this discussion. Gail Stokes is a contributor to The Black
Woman and the subject of Firestone’s analysis.

58

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Black feminists have rightly criticized Firestone’s treatment of race, and her use of
Stokes’ writing is equally deserving of condemnation.87 She quotes from Gail
Stokes’ “Black Woman to Black Man,” published in the Liberator in 1968, as
evidence that “the black woman has as much contempt for the black man as he has
for her.”88 Firestone describes Stokes, cast as a modern-day Sapphire, as lobbing
“accusations” at the Black man.89 But it isn’t just Black men and women Firestone
pits against one another. She quotes from Edith Hambrick’s response to Stokes,
positioning Hambrick, who offers love and unconditional support to Black men, as
a dupe who has “fallen for” their “lines.”90 Letters to the Editor of
the Liberator indicate that Black men took exception to Stokes’ writing as well. The
Black Men’s Council of Boston issued a “decree in answer to sister Gail Stokes”
informing “black sisters to get it together.”91 Given the likelihood that white
feminists, Black men, and even other Black women might use Black feminists’
words against them, it is not surprising that Millett, Greer, and Firestone are from
two to almost eight times more likely to use love than contributors to The Black
Woman.92
There remains, however, an alternative reading of Stokes’s piece: she has given up
on love.93 The speaker eulogizes her marriage — she has received “no love” from
“the human being I thought I loved and that I thought loved me.”94 Furthermore, his
rejection has come in the most injurious form possible, through an invidious
comparison to white women: “how could I love you and want to be with you? . . .
White women never open the door for their husbands [looking] the way you Black
bitches do.”95 Like some white feminists, Stokes equates marriage with death. “I had
been laid out in my coffin unknowingly the day I had married you.”96 Hers is not the
civil death of couverture, but the end of the self that threatens to transform her into
“a walking mummy.”97 The speaker also points out that racism, along with
patriarchy, influences Black romantic relationships. She describes an endless cycle
of subordination through unwanted pregnancies and violence that eventually
destroyed the love and respect she felt for her partner. While she desires “black love
and dignity,” she refuses it under the guise of Black Power or Black nationalistinspired endearments such as “my Black goddess.”98 The speaker has given up on
her marriage, not because she lacks love for Black men, but because this specific
Black man rejected her love.
Stokes’s piece in The Black Woman bears a different title, “Black Man, My Man
Listen!” but it still personally addresses a Black man. In this version, the speaker
pleads with her man to listen instead of “calling” him out.99 Rather than indicting the
Black man for his faults, she acknowledges his disempowerment: “I know how they
have used and abused you.”100 This time, love exists: “you and me, loving each other

59

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

in our blackness.”101 While the speaker still feels anger, her fears replace the detailed
complaints of The Liberator piece. In the end, the speaker makes a heartfelt plea for
“comfort” and “reassurance,” but the allusion, in the final line, to a lack of any
commonalities suggests that he never offered them.102
While other essays in The Black Woman do not deal with love at such length, some
touch on the subject. Joanna Clark connects love to manipulation: “When my
husband said ‘love,’ he meant whatever emotion he could generate in you that would
sustain you enough to put up for and with him.”103 Bambara also rejects the female
subordination Black nationalists sought to impose on romantic relationships: “Of
course there are any number of women around willing to walk ten paces back . . . I
happen to love my ole man, and I would be loathe to patronize him in that way.” 104
Joyce Green’s essay also considers comparisons to white women: “some brothers
are so busy being masterful that they have no time for a tender concept like love. . .
. They say, look at how the white woman helps her man.”105 Abbey Lincoln,
commenting on Black men’s application of white beauty standards to their mates,
describes “the Black woman” as “hurt, confused, frustrated, angry, resentful, [and]
frightened” an apt description of the speaker in Stokes’ articles.106
While in the section on Freud, we argued that histories of 1970s feminism have too
often disconnected what were once overlapping contributions, here we suggest that
many accounts of feminism’s history have not considered sufficiently early Black
feminists' perspectives on love.107 My reading indicates that Black feminists
addressed the same issues — love as manipulation, love as subordination, love as
oppression — as frequently as the white women who were more commonly credited
with developing feminist critiques of love. Furthermore, rather than singularly
focusing on patriarchy as the mechanism impinging on love, the essays in The Black
Woman consider the consequences of racism — poverty, violence against women,
and limited economic opportunities — in the process offering a broader structural
critique of love.

Proposing Solutions
In the late 1960s, “everything became ‘political,’” as a volume on feminism, theory
and politics has observed.108 Keyness results for all three corpora support this
generalization. Each corpus contains a key word that alludes to politics: political in
the sample corpus, rights in the women corpus, and revolution in the feminist
corpus.109 The sample corpus uses political at a rate twofold that found in the women
or the feminist corpus.110 The context appears to be quite traditional. Frequent
bigrams, including political system, political power, and political parties, indicate

60

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

that the political retained links to formal politics. Alternatively, political in the
women corpus revolves around rights. The women corpus is over four times as
likely and the feminist corpus twice as likely to use rights as the sample.111 Political
rights is the most frequent bigram. The specific rights sought
are equal and women’s instead of civil, the most common bigram of rights in the
other corpora. As in the sample corpus, the methods for obtaining equal rights, such
as amendment to the Constitution or from the civil rights act, reflect traditional
politics.
For feminists, “everything became ‘political’ ” in different ways. Keyword analysis
indicates that instead of rights, authors in the six feminist bestsellers
demand revolution and political power, the most common bigram. The feminist
corpus is eight times as like to use revolution as the women and twice as likely as
the sample.112 In the process of advocating for revolution, feminist authors
transformed how the word political was understood.
This achievement is among the most widely recognized of 1970s feminism. A 1990s
feminist theory text proceeded to name all the bestsellers except The Black
Woman when discussing "the substantial body of literature” about feminism’s “new
ideas,” including the argument that "no aspect of life lacks a political dimension.”
According to that author, “the articulation of Black feminist critique lay . . . in the
future.” Over twenty years later, that same conclusion appears in a political science
textbook that credits radical feminists — with Figes, Firestone, Greer, and Millett
specifically singled out — for contributing to “a deliberate widening of the political
sphere.” This author views Black feminism as “added on” to “early second wave
feminism.”
The reframing of the political is most evident in Kate Millett’s concept of sexual
politics. According to Millett, a real sexual revolution would not merely lead to
increased sexual freedom but “would bring the institution of patriarchy to an end.”113
Authors in The Black Woman consider the black revolution, the top bigram
for revolution, but they also propose that revolution must overturn gendered
hierarchies. Gwen Patton concludes from Black women’s struggle to “define their
role” in “the making of the Revolution” that the order of “men on top, women on
bottom” must be abandoned.114 While The Black Woman does not contain the
bigram sexual revolution, contributors were quite interested in the same issues
Millett addresses in her well-known concept of sexual politics.
This essay does not define the political as that relatively narrow and exclusive world
of meetings, chairmen, and parties. The term “politics” shall refer to power-

61

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

structured relationships, arrangements whereby one group of persons is controlled
by another.”115
Power, the key concept under sexual politics, is key in the feminist corpus compared
to the sample corpus and the feminist corpus.116 It appears most in Dialectic of
Sex and The Black Woman, with no statistically significant difference between the
two texts.117 Firestone’s analysis parallels Millett’s by focusing on male power, the
most frequent bigram in her book. The Black Woman references the power
structure, the most common bigram of power after Black Power, not only the power
of patriarchy.
Just as Kate Millett coined the term sexual politics to refer to power dynamics in all
interpersonal relationships, contributors to The Black Woman also proposed new
terms to explain gendered and racialized power structures. Frances Beal’s phrase
“bedroom politics” adds both nuance and specificity to Millett’s sexual politics.118
The term refers to the intrusion by “political factors into the privacy of the
bedchamber,” infringing upon Black women's “rights and responsibilities.”119 Beal
uses the term in the context of forced sterilization of Black women, which she names
an “act of oppression” designed to perpetuate the “power imbalance between the
white haves and the non-white havenots.”120 The “ruling-class elite” uses the
abhorrent practice to keep “itself in control.” Similarly, she points out that restrictive
abortion laws provide yet another “means of subjugation.”121 Beal ends her essay by
connecting the personal to power. “The Revolutionary cannot focus only on
changing who is in a “position of power” but must also commit to “creating new
institutions that will eliminate all forms of oppression,” including “traditional
personal relationships between man and woman.”122
Trigrams in The Black Woman point to yet another contribution to theorizing power
hierarchies. A reprinted November 1968 speech given by Grace Lee Boggs
addresses the white power structure.123 While Boggs uses personal in this speech to
refer to the “concept of the individual,” her insistence that “social issues” can be
“not only personally but socially relevant” relates her analysis to the reframing of
the political.124 She offers a “new politics . . . developing in the Black movement.”
“This sense of one's own personal-political value . . . has to be developed . . . in
relationship with others,” and it must involve “struggle and conflict with those in
power” to define concrete issues of consequence to the group.125 To anyone familiar
with feminism of this era, Boggs’s formulation of the “personal-political” will recall
the “the personal is political,” often cited as the defining insight of 1970s feminists.
While white feminists have received credit for this formulation, it did not emerge in

62

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

a vacuum.126 Like so much else in women’s liberation, it bears the imprint of writing
about Black women’s experiences.
The feminist re-framing of the political as power is a signal achievement of 1970s
feminism at a time when other writing about women addressed rights.
Computational text analysis indicates that The Black Woman has much to offer
histories that trace the development of these ideas. The Black
Woman uses power, revolution,
and political more
than The
Female
127
Eunuch. Why then does Greer get cited along with these other works while The
Black Woman gets ignored? Why has Beal’s “bedroom politics” or Boggs’
“personal-political” not been incorporated along with “sexual politics” in accounts
of feminist reconceptualizations of power?
Here I’d like to suggest that this is a (bad) habit of citation. It has become customary
to lump the four bestsellers of 1970 together when discussing some of their
contributions to feminisms’ history. This tendency began in early responses to these
books. Most notably, Juliet Mitchell treated all four monographs together to criticize
feminism’s rejection of Freud.128 Subsequently, disciplinary histories or genealogies
situated the texts together in framing the origins of the academic fields of women’s
studies and feminist theory.129 Those works became the foundation for a “stock
narrative” of feminism by authors whose work does not actually focus on these
texts.130

Which Books Made Us Feminists?
Although author deaths and publishing anniversaries have inspired recent reflections
on some of these titles as books that converted readers to feminism, the tendency has
deeper roots. After publishing The Feminine Mystique, Betty Friedan titled an
edited volume of letters she received It Changed My Life, so widespread was the
transformative impact of her magnum opus.131 In 1990, the Modern Language
Association annual meeting included a session called "Books That Changed Our
Lives” with participant-remarks later published in Women’s Studies
Quarterly.132 However, we have found no considerations of The Black
Woman under this particular rubric. As Beverly Guy Sheftall notes, “The Black
Woman was as important . . . as Kate Millett’s pioneering and more
celebrated Sexual Politics, though Bambara’s work has rarely been seen in this
context by white feminists.”133
While high profile newspapers and magazines may not have published authors who
considered The Black Woman among the texts that made women feminists, many

63

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

prominent Black women have written about life-changing encounters with the
anthology. Gloria T. Hull, who encountered the book in college, recalled that it
“taught me how our position could be both thoroughly feminist and for-real
Black.”134 As a child, Farah Jasmine Griffins saw the cover depicting “a beautiful
brown woman with a large Afro” in a bookstore and knew “I had to have that
book.”135 bell hooks has acknowledged the importance of The Black Woman on her
development: “I was a senior in high school when TCB published The Black
Woman: An Anthology (1970), and single-handedly the anthology placed Black
women at the center of various feminist debates.”136
The methods section conveyed a frank disavowal of disinterested readings and a
defense of computational text analysis as a method for making historiographical
interventions. It seems fitting then that my conclusion should sum up how these two
factors shaped the ensuing discussion of results. To those who fear that computers
will overtake our training as historians, our approach — historical interpretation
assisted by computational analysis — might offer some reassurances. We are guided
by the results, not driven by them. We began with a commitment to
foregrounding The Black Woman.
In challenging Freudianism, feminists of the 1970s receive at least partial credit for
contributing to the decline of a major intellectual force. Concluding that Black
women never addressed Freud because The Black Woman barely names him seems
overly simplistic. Computational text analysis suggested how to read The Black
Woman for Freudianism. The authors scoffed at penis envy and mocked the “white
man’s penis hang up,” but they focused on the Freudian-influenced Moynihan
Report.137 Keyness and entity recognition pointed to Moynihan. His report reflects a
reliance on psychology similar to that seen in the sample corpus and in feminists’
efforts to de-center psychoanalysis. Follow-up computational analysis highlighted
important contributions in The Black Woman to these intellectual projects,
including the greater frequency of experts and keywords used in opposing
Moynihan's conclusions, including matriarch and emasculated.
Looking for love relied on a totally different strategy. We suspect this element of the
project is most vulnerable to the charge that computational text analysis proves
unnecessary. Perhaps this is true, but we reached these conclusion with it
nonetheless.
Keyness
results
in
the
women
corpus,
such
as marriage and family, indicated a point of departure for considering what feminist
bestsellers added to the discussion of these very topical concerns. Firestone and
Greer devoted entire sections of their books to love, while evidence for this concern
in The Black Woman is scant; marriage, family, and love appear with the least

64

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

frequency in The Black Woman. Naming the problem could never be as simple as
indicting men for Black women. Furthermore, Black love, constrained since slavery,
as Patricia Robinson’s essay reminds readers, remained a loaded topic for Black
women who faced external criticism from white policy analysts and censure within
their community.138 The reasons behind the silences and absences offered a way to
relate the texts when entity recognition pointed to Firestone’s appropriation of
Stokes’ writing. With the themes of her work in mind, I used AntConc’s
concordance view to explore love throughout the anthology and confirmed she was
not alone in her analysis.
Feminists received the greatest recognition for interventions into political discourses
and for the theoretical concepts they developed to replace those they
dismantled. Power appeared in The Black Woman in ways that related quite directly
to better-known formulations by white feminists. Computational text analysis
identified at least two key terms related to reframing the political, Beal’s “bedroom
politics” and Boggs’ “personal-political.” This analysis also provided the clearest
example of where the habit of lumping the 1970 monographs together had given
credit where it wasn’t quite due. Although examination of Greer’s book using
different terms might have found her to be a more significant participant in dialogues
around the political, in the terms used for this study, The Black Woman contributed
to these discussions more than The Female Eunuch did.
These results offer a new kind of counterpoint to a historiographical tradition that
often dates Black feminism’s emergence to the late 1970s. Descriptions of The
Black Woman as the “Black women’s equivalent of Sisterhood Is Powerful”
unjustifiably prioritize one work over the other. The results shared in this essay are
meant to inspire scholars to reconsider the texts they teach, the individuals they cite,
and the genealogies they trace, as well as to demonstrate that methods adopted from
the digital humanities may bring renewed attention to some of the authors that
computational text analysis singled out.

References
Susan Magarey, Dangerous Ideas: Women’s Liberation – Women’s Studies – Around the World (Adelaide:
University of Adelaide Press, 2014); Bonnie J. Dow, Watching Women’s Liberation, 1970: Feminism’s Pivotal Year
on the Network News (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2014). It was also the year the first conferences on
women’s liberation occurred in the UK in February and in May in Australia. See Howard Malchow, Special
Relations: The Americanization of Britain? (Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 2011).
1

65

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

2

Beverly Guy-Sheftall, Words of Fire: An Anthology of African-American Feminist Thought (New York: The New
Press, 2011), 14.
3

Magarey, Dangerous Ideas.

4

Lisa Disch, “Introduction,” South Atlantic Quarterly 114, no. 4 (October 1, 2015): 678.

5

No place is the lore of these texts clearer than in references to each of them as bestsellers. Every single one has
been referred to in print, by both journalists and scholars, as bestsellers although only two titles appeared on
bestseller lists. However, bestseller, despite the keeping of official lists, is an imprecise term. A book might be
described as a bestseller if it topped sales for its publishing house. Random House considered Sisterhood is Powerful
it among its “best sellers” in 1970. [“Paperback Bestsellers,” Publishers Weekly, February 8, 1971, 41.],
Compounding the issue even further, such lists did not exist yet in 1970 for the UK as neither The Sunday Times or
the Bookseller lists started until the mid-1970s. We refer to these texts as bestsellers for all these reasons, but most
specifically because when compared to the literature put out by the movement itself, these books enjoyed
significantly larger sales and circulation.
Adams, “The Book That Made Us Feminists.” Adams argued for a collective stake in “foundational texts of second
wave feminism,” by which she meant The Dialectic of Sex, Sisterhood is Powerful, The Female Eunuch but above
all Sexual Politics. A similarly titled piece in The Guardian features a photo of Greer and considers her work and
Millett’s. Margaret Atwood et al., “The Book That Made Me A Feminist,” The Guardian, December 16, 2017.
6

Marilyn Bender, “Books to Liberate Women,” The New York Times, book review section, March 8, 1970, 6; Mary
Stott, “Is Marriage Worth Saving,” The Guardian, December 17, 1970, 9.
7

“Best Seller List,” Publishers Weekly, August 24, 1970, 90. Millett describes the publication history of Sexual
Politics in the introduction to the 2000 edition. Kate Millett, Sexual Politics (Champaign: University of Illinois
Press, [1970] 2000), ix.
8

9

Millet, 22. A note on style, the reader will have no doubt observed that thus far title of books have been
underlined. In this essay, italicized words refer to individual words user in or derived from computational analysis.
Results that appear in quotations marks, such as multi-word expressions are verbatim from the text and thus they
retain such punctuation.
10
11

Eva Figes, Patriarchal Attitudes (New York: Fawcett Books, [1970] 1971).
Germaine Greer, The Female Eunuch (London: Flamingo, 1970), 18.

12

Millett entered the New York Times Bestseller list on September 13, 1970, and September 28, 1970, for
the Publishers Weekly list. Greer attained the number one spot in the Publishers Weekly August 1, 1971 issue.
13

Shulamith Firestone, The Dialectic of Sex: The Case For Feminist Revolution (New York: Bantam Books, 1971),
20.
Firestone’s publisher announced a full publicity campaign in Publishers Weekly including “Author appearances
on radio and television” but I can find no evidence of Firestone doing either. “Morrow,” Publishers Weekly, August
31, 1970, 220. Most sources indicate Firestone disappeared from public view shortly after the publication of her
book as her mental health issues worsened. See Susan Faludi, “Death of A Revolutionary,” The New Yorker, April
15, 2013.
14

15

Toni Morrison, ed., Deep Sightings and Rescue Missions: Fiction, Essays, and Conversations (New York:
Pantheon Books, 1996), 118.

66

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Louis Massiah, “How She Came By Her Name: an Interview with Louis Massiah,” interview by Toni Cade
Bambara, in Deep Sightings and Rescue Missions: Fiction, Essays, and Conversations, ed. Toni Morrison (New
York: Pantheon Books, 1996).
16

“NAL has Reported New Printings on a Numbers,” Publishers Weekly, October 5, 1970, 45. Second printing date
is referenced by Bambara in “How She Came By Her Name,” 230.
17

Robin Morgan, ed., Sisterhood Is Powerful: An Anthology of Writings from the Women’s Liberation (New York:
Random House, 1970), 1. On the publishing history of Sisterhood is Powerful see Jennifer Gilley, “Feminist
Publishing/Publishing Feminism: Experimentation In Second-Wave Book Publishing,” in This Book Is an Action:
Feminist Print Culture and Activist Aesthetics, ed. Jaime Harker and Cecilia Konchar Farr (Champaign: University
of Illinois Press, 2015), 23-45.
18

19

Clare Hemmings, Why Stories Matter: The Political Grammar of Feminist Theory (Durham: Duke University
Press, 2011).
20

Janet R. Jakobsen, Working Alliances and the Politics of Difference: Diversity and Feminist Ethics (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1998), 98.
21

Chela Sandoval, Methodology of the Oppressed (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000), 46.

Lisa Maria Hogeland, “Against Generational Thinking, or, Some Things That ‘Third Wave’ Feminism
Isn’t,” Women’s Studies in Communication 24, no. 1 (2001): 110.
22

Astrid Henry, Not My Mother’s Sister: Generational Conflict and Third-Wave Feminism (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 2004), 33.
23

24

Victoria Browne, Feminism, Time, and Nonlinear History (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2014).

25

Kristen Hogan, The Feminist Bookstore Movement: Lesbian Antiracism and Feminist Accountability (Durham:
Duke University Press, 2016), 4.
Maria Cotera, “‘Invisibility Is an Unnatural Disaster’: Feminist Archival Praxis After the Digital Turn,” South
Atlantic Quarterly 114, no. 4 (2015): 782.
26

27

Terese Jonsson, “White Feminist Stories: Locating Race in Narratives of British Feminism,” Feminist Media
Studies 14, no. 6 (2014): 15.
28

Jennifer C. Nash, Black Feminism Reimagined: After Intersectionality (Durham Duke University Press, 2018).

Kathi Weeks and Michèle Barrett, “Foreword,” in Women’s Oppression Today: The Marxist/Feminist Encounter,
2014, xi.
29

Sisterhood is Powerful contained “three views” on “Women In The Black Liberation Movement.” See Brian
Norman, “The Consciousness-Raising Document, Feminist Anthologies, and Black Women in Sisterhood Is
Powerful,” Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies 27, no. 3 (2006): 38–64. ))
30

Roth, “The Making of the Vanguard Center," 73. Black Woman is “not a Black feminist text as we have come to
understand the term,” some of the essays “begin to theorize a Black feminist politics and praxis.” Farah Jasmine
Griffin, “Conflict and Chorus: Reconsidering Toni Cade’s "The Black Woman: An Anthology,” in Is It Nation
Time?: Contemporary Essays on Black Power and Black Nationalism, ed. Eddie S. Glaude (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2002), 121. Kimberly Nichele Brown considers it “the quintessential text of Black feminist thought
of the second wave.” Kimberly Nichele Brown, Writing the Black Revolutionary Diva: Women’s Subjectivity and
31

67

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

the Decolonizing Text (Indiana University Press, 2010), 71. For the purposes of this study, we read The Black
Woman as a feminist text.
32

The approach was suggested by Richard Jean So as a way to address a reviewer’s concerns about conducting
analysis of a small corpus of texts. Richard graciously provided not only access to the HathiTrust Research center
which Michelle Moravec, a researcher from a non-member institution, could not obtain, but also provided funding
for Kent Kai-hsiung Chang to conduct the research.
33

The publishers were Random House, Penguin, Knopf, Pantheon, HarperCollins, Harper & Row Hatchette, Little
Brown, Basic, Simon & Schuster, Scribner, MacMillan, FSG, Henry Holt, and Scholastic.
34

See “HTRC Analytics: About.”

Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher Manning. “Incorporating Non-local Information into
Information Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sampling.” Proceedings of the 43nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (2005): 363–370. See also The Stanford Natural Language Processing Group,
“Stanford Named Entity Recognizer (NER).”
35

36

Lawrence Anthony, AntConc Version 3.5.8, software, 2019.

Ted Dunning, “Accurate Methods for the Statistics of Surprise and Coincidence,” Computational Linguistics 19,
no. 1 (1993): 61–74.
37

As described in Kenneth Ward Church, and Patrick Hanks, “Word Association Norms, Mutual Information, and
Lexicography,” Computational Linguistics 16, no. 1 (1990): 22–29.
38

39

Paul Rayson, “Log-likelihood and effect size calculator.”

40

In the following analysis we provide log likelihood, a statistical measure for the probability of observed
differences across corpora, but we also rely on log ratio to indicate effect size. As Andrew Hardie, who developed
this metric explains, Log Ratio equals the binary log of the ratio of relative frequencies. Each increase of one
indicates a doubling of the ratio as indicated in the chart below.
•
•
•
•
•
•

A word has the same relative frequency in A and B – the binary log of the ratio is 0
A word is 2 times more common in A than in B – the binary log of the ratio is 1
A word is 4 times more common in A than in B – the binary log of the ratio is 2
A word is 8 times more common in A than in B – the binary log of the ratio is 3
A word is 16 times more common in A than in B – the binary log of the ratio is 4
A word is 32 times more common in A than in B – the binary log of the ratio is 5

Andrew Hardie, “Log Ratio – an informal introduction, Corpus Approaches to the Social Sciences,” April 28, 2014.
41

When providing examples from the historiography of 1970s feminism, we have followed Claire Hemmings
approach in Why Stories Matter. Specific citations are not provided for quotations as the intent is to highlight
prevalent patterns of interpretation rather than to call out specific authors.
Benita Roth, “The Making of the Vanguard Center: Black Feminist Emergence in the 1960s and 1970s,” in Still
Lifting, Still Climbing: Contemporary African American Women’s Activism, ed. Kimberly Springer (New York:
New York University Press, 1999), 25.
42

43

Kimberly Springer, Introduction, Still Lifting, Still Climbing, 3.

44

In addition to the works cited elsewhere in this essay, we are deeply indebted to other authors. Kimberly
Springer, Living For The Revolution : Black Feminist Organizations, 1968-1980 (Durham: Duke University Press,

68

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

2005); Kimberly Springer, ‘Black Feminists Respond to Black Power Masculinism,’ in Peniel E. Joseph ed, The
Black Power Movement: Rethinking The Civil Rights-Black Power Era (New York: Routledge, 2006), 105-118;
Stephen M. Ward, ‘The Third World Women’s Alliance: Black Feminist Radicalism and Black Power Politics,’
in The Black Power Movement, 119-144; Dayo F. Gore, Jeanne Theoharis, and Komozi Woodward, eds, Want To
Start A Revolution?: Radical Women In The Black Freedom Struggle (New York: New York University Press,
2009); Ula Y. Taylor, ‘Black Feminisms and Human Agency’ in Nancy Hewitt. Ed. No Permanent Waves:
Recasting Histories of U.S. Feminism (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2010): 61-76; Erik S.
McDuffie, Sojourning For Freedom : Black Women, American Communism, And The Making Of Black Left
Feminism (Durham: Duke University Press, 2011).
45

Ellen Herman, The Romance of American Psychology: Political Culture in the Age of Experts (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1996), 6.
46

We verified entity results for the six best sellers using the concordancing feature of AntConc with versions of the
six bestsellers that have been stripped of this material.
47

Sample compared to women psychology LL 329.88 LR 1.1, psychoanalysis LL 26.56 LR 1.06, Feminist
compared to sample psychology LL 69.84, LR 1.04, psychoanalysis LL 115.8, LR 2.9.
48

49

Figes, Patriarchal Attitudes, 15.

50

Ibid., 11.
Andrew Salter, The Case Against Psychoanalysis (New York: Henry Holt & Company, 1952).

51

Robert Stoller, Sex and Gender: On the Development of Masculinity and Femininity (New York: (Science House,
1968).
52

Gearhard 13-14.

Experts is a low frequency words across the texts. Figes doesn’t use it or any of its variants. The difference with
Greer (n=5) and Sisterhood is Powerful (n=9) is not statistically significant. The Black Woman (n=10) compared to
Firestone (n=2) LL 4.63 LR 2.09, Millett (n=2) LL 12.37, LR 3.27.
53

54

Bambara, "Preface," 8–9.

55

Ibid., 7–8.

56

Ibid., 9; Toni Cade Bambara, “The Pill : Genocide or Liberation?” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, 165.

57

The Black Woman Moynihan (n=10). Feminist (=12 ) compared to sample (n=71) LL 426.06 LR 2.9, women
(n=4) LL 46.83, LR 5.34.
Roxanne Dunbar “Female Liberation as the Basis for Social Revolution,” in Sisterhood is Powerful, ed. Robin
Morgan, 497, Firestone, Dialectic, 104.
58

59

Daniel Patrick Moynihan, The Negro Family: The Case for National Action, Office of Policy Planning and
Research United States Department of Labor, March 1965, 5.
Laura Dawkins, “The Family Romance in Black and White: Paternal Abdication and the ‘Touch of the Mother’ in
Marita Bonner’s ‘One Boy’s Story,’” in Psychoanalysis in Context, ed. Alvin Henry (Newcastle upon Tyne:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2020), 110.
60

69

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

61

Robert O. Self, All in the Family: The Realignment of American Democracy Since the 1960s (New York:
Macmillan, 2012), 30.
Bambara, “Preface,” 1; Keira V. Williams, Amazons in America: Matriarchs, Utopians, and Wonder Women in
U.S. Popular Culture (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Press, 2019).
62

63

Adele Jones and Group, “Ebony Minds, Black Voices,” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, 185.

64

Jean Carey Bond and Patricia Peery, “Is the Black Male Castrated?” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, 115.

Pat Robinson and Group, “A Historical and Critical Essay for Black Women in the Cities, June 1969,” in The
Black Woman: An Anthology, 199.
65

Frances Beal, “Double Jeopardy: To Be Black and Female,” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, 91. All citations
are to this publication of the essay.
66

67

Entity recognition indicates overlapping experts. Although that is beyond the scope of this project, one intriguing
example is discussion of Robert Briffault’s evidence for matriarchy in The Black Woman, The Female
Eunuch, Sexual Politics and Sisterhood is Powerful.
68

Ian Haney López, Dog Whistle Politics: How Coded Racial Appeals Have Reinvented Racism and Wrecked the
Middle Class (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015), 94–97.
69

Moynihan, The Negro Family, 30.

70

Bambara, “On The Issues of Roles,” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, 109.

Emasculated appears twice in Sisterhood is Powerful, once because of Beal’s essay and once in the contribution
by Eleanor Holmes Norton.
71

72

Moynihan, The Negro Family, 18.

73

Beal “Double Jeopardy,” 92.

74

Ibid.; Lindsey, 85–89; Bond and Peery, “Is the Black Male Castrated?” 117.

The Black Woman provides dates for many of these works included. Scholars have dated Patton’s essay to at least
a draft form in August 1968 (Roth, Separate Roads to Feminism, 95), Beal began what developed into “Double
Jeopardy” in the fall of 1968.
75

76

Roth, “The Making of the Vanguard Center,” 73.

Beal’s named is misspelled Beale in The Black Woman. Frances Beal, “Double Jeopardy: To Be Black and
Female,” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, ed. Toni Cade Bambara (New York: New American Library, 1970),
95; Frances M. Beal, “Double Jeopardy: To Be Black and Female,” in Sisterhood Is Powerful: An Anthology of
Writings from the Women’s Liberation, ed. Robin Morgan (New York: Random House, 1970), 340. Beal recalled
that Morgan “wanted an essay on black women. And I said I would take a few of the things I had already started on
and pull together kind of an overview.” Frances Beal, interview by Loretta Ross Beal, transcript, 38, Voices of
Feminism Oral History Project, Sophia Smith Collection, Smith College.. In the Fall of 1969 she published a
different version of this essay. On the publishing history of “Double Jeopardy,” see Ashley D. Farmer, Remaking
Black Power: How Black Women Transformed an Era (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2017),
165–66.
77

70

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Alison Lefkovitz, Strange Bedfellows: Marriage in the Age of Women’s Liberation (Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2018), 2; David Popenoe, War Over the Family (New York: Routledge, 2017).
78

79

Family sample corpus to women corpus, LL 5178.71, LR 1.4, sample corpus to feminist corpus LL 1004.96, LR
1.76. marriage sample corpus to women corpus LL 9087.33, LR 2.76, sample corpus to feminist corpus LL 1525.03,
LR 3.08. love sample corpus to women corpus LL 4985.32, LR 3.71, sample corpus to feminist corpus LL 2381.85,
LR 3.02. There is a statistically significant difference in use of marriage and family in feminist and women but the
effect size is not as drastic. Family feminist corpora to women corpora LL 53.93 LR .36 and marriage feminist
corpora to women corpora LL 26.06, LR .31. Love Feminist corpora compared to sample corpora, 2397.65, log ratio
3.03. Feminist corpora compared to women corpora LL 448, log ratio 1.12.
80

The Female Eunuch to the five other bestsellers LL = 276.31.

Firestone’s ideas about love have recently received more scholarly attention. See Kathi Weeks, “Down with Love:
Feminist Critique and the New Ideologies of Work,” WSQ: Women’s Studies Quarterly 45, no. 3 (2017): 38. Alva
Gotby, “Liberated Sex: Firestone On Love And Sexuality,” Mai: Feminism And Visual Cultures, April 18, 2018.
Jacobin Magazine excerpted part of Firestone’s chapter on love in February 2019.
81

82

Firestone, Dialectic, 121.

83

Ibid., 139.

84

Millett, Sexual Politics, 37.

Dianne M. Stewart, Black Women, Black Love: America’s War on African American Marriage (New York: Basic
Books, 2020).
85

86

Brian G. Ogolsky, Sally A. Lloyd, and Rodney M. Cate, The Developmental Course of Romantic
Relationships (New York: Routledge, 2013); emphasis ours. Stewart, Black Women, Black Love.
Among the earliest and best known are Angela Davis, “Rape, Racism, and the Myth of the Black Rapist,”
in Women, Race, and Class (New York: Random House, 1981), 172-201. Hortense J. Spillers, “Interstices: A Small
Drama of Words,” in Pleasure and Danger: Exploring Female Sexuality, ed. Carole S. Vance (London: Pandora,
1992), 73–100; [Scholar and Feminist IX Conference, “Towards a Politics of Sexuality”, Held at Barnard College
in New York in 1982, ed. Carole S Vance (London: Pandora, 1992), 73–100. Margaret A. Simons, “Racism and
Feminism: A Schism in the Sisterhood,” Feminist Studies 5, no. 2 (1979): 384–401. Hortense J. Spillers, Black,
White, and in Color: Essays on American Literature and Culture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003).
87

88

The original article is Gail A. Stokes, "Black Woman to Black Man", Liberator 8, no. 12 (1968): 21-22. Citation
here refer to the reprint in Robert Staples, ed. The Black Family: Essays and Studies, (Belmont: Wadsworth
Publishing Company, 1971), 159-161. Firestone, Dialectic, 112.
89

Firestone, Dialectic, 119.

90

Edith R. Hambrick, “Black Woman to Black Woman,” Liberator 9, no. 2 (February 1969): 8, 115; Firestone,
Dialectic, 119. This conflict is discussed in Christopher M. Tinson, Radical Intellect: Liberator Magazine and Black
Activism in the 1960s (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2017), 108.
91

Octavius Abou, letter to the editor, Liberator 9, no. 2 (February 1969): 22.

92

Love The Black Woman compared to Patriarchal Attitudes, LL 49.42, LR 1.02, The Black Woman compared
to Sexual Politics, LL 34.79LR1.2, The Black Woman compared to The Dialectic of Sex LL 141, LR 2.4, The Black
Woman compared to The Female Eunuch LL 241. 62, LR 2.8.

71

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

Elizabeth F. Hood points out that Stokes’s piece is “a summation of a real tension recurring in relationships
between black men and women.” Elizabeth F. Hood, “Black Women, White Women: Separate Paths To
Liberation,” The Black Scholar 9, no. 7 (1978): 50. bell hooks, criticizes Stokes for buying into the male
breadwinner ideal. bell hooks, Ain’t I a Woman: Black Women and Feminism (Boston: South End Press, 1981), 92–
93.
93

Gail A. Stokes, “Black Woman to Black Man,” in The Black Family: Essays and Studies, ed. Robert Staples
(Belmont: Wadsworth Pub. Co., 1971), 160.
94

95

Ibid.

96

Ibid.

97

Ibid., 161.

98

Ibid., 160.

Gail A. Stokes, “Black Man, My Man Listen!,” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, ed. Toni Cade Bambara
(New York: New American Library, 1970), 111–12.
99

100

Ibid., 111.

101

Ibid.

102

Ibid., 112.

Joanna Clarke, “Motherhood,” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, ed. Toni Cade Bambara (New York: New
American Library, 1970), 68.
103

104

Bambara, “On The Issues of Roles,” 108.

105

Joyce Green, “Black Romanticism,” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, 138.

106

Abbey Lincoln, “Who Will Revere the Black Woman?,” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, 83.

On the other hand, Patricia Hill Collins devotes an entire chapter to black women’s love and relationships, which
considers many of the essays in The Black Woman. Patricia Hill Collins, Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge,
Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment (New York: Routledge, 2000), 149-172.
107

Elizabeth Weed, “Introduction: Terms of Reference,” in Coming to Terms (RLE Feminist Theory): Feminism,
Theory, Politics, ed. Elizabeth Weed (New York: Routledge, 1989), xv.
108

109

political in the sample compared to women and feminist corpora LL 2489.14, rights in the women corpus
compared to the sample and feminist corpora LL 7552.23, and revolution in the feminist corpus compared to the
sample and women corpora LL 862.08.
110

political sample corpus compared to feminist corpus LL 1004.96, LR 1.76. Sample corpus compared to women
corpus, LL 5178.71, LR 1.4. Feminist corpus compared to women corpus LL 49.43, LR 0.46
111

Rights women corpus compared to sample corpus LL 9072.52, LR 2.48. Feminist corpus compared to sample
corpus LL 292.12, LR 1.64. Women corpus compared to feminist corpus LL 130.91, LR 0.84.

72

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

112

Revolution feminist corpora compared to women corpora LL 1406.51, LR 3.09. Feminist corpus compared to
sample corpus LL 719.96, LR 1.86. Sample corpus compared to women corpus LL 838.78, LR 1.23.
113
114

Millett, Sexual Politics, 61.

Gwen Patton, “Black People and the Victorian Ethos," The Black Woman: An Anthology, 143, 148.

115

Millett, Sexual Politics, 63.

116

There is a statistically significant difference between the sample corpus and the women corpus with a very small
effect size and between the feminist corpus and the sample corpus with a somewhat larger effect size although still
less than 1. However the disparities between feminist and the women corpus indicate a difference of two
fold. power sample corpus compared to women corpus, LL 711.56, LR 0.062. power feminist corpus compared to
sample corpus, LL 132.85, LR 0.66. power feminist corpus compared to women corpus, LL 409.11, LR 1.28.
117

Power in The Dialectic of Sex 16 normalized to 10000 words, The Black Woman 13.6 normalized to 10000
words. LL 1.85.
118

Beal, “Double Jeopardy,” 95.

119

Ibid., 95, 97.

120

Ibid., 95.

121

Ibid., 97.

122

Ibid., 100.

123

Grace Lee Boggs, “The Black Revolution in America,” in The Black Woman: An Anthology, 221.

124

Ibid.

125

Ibid.

“The personal is political” first appeared appended to a memo by Carol Hanisch reprinted in Notes From the
Second Year. Hanisch credits someone in the editorial process with formulating the title. That volume of Notes was
edited by Firestone and Anne Koedt, published in April of 1970, but the theory that underlay of the slogan had been
developing for years among both white and Black feminists. In a letter of January 1969, Gwen Patton reflects, “I am
of the opinion that our problems, even on a day-to-day living basis, are political.” Quoted in Stephen M. Ward,
“‘Ours Too Was a Struggle for a Better World’: Activist Intellectuals and the Radical Promise of the Black Power
Movement, 1962-1972” (PhD dissertation, University of Texas, Austin, 2002), 234.
126

127

The Black Woman compared to The Female Eunuch. political LL 6.96 LR 0.89. revolution LL 38.82 LR
1.68. power LL 67.81, LR 1.89.
128

Juliet Mitchell, Psychoanalysis and Feminism (Basic Books, 1974).

129

Ellen Carol DuBois et al., Feminist Scholarship: Kindling in the Groves of Academe (Champaign: University of
Illinois Press, 1985), 35; Dale Spender, For the Record: The Making and Meaning of Feminist Knowledge (New
York: Women’s Press, 1985).

73

F E M I N I S T BE S T SE L L E R S : A D I G I T A L H I S T O R Y O F 1 9 7 0S F E M I N I S M

Kelly Coogan-Gehr, “Origin Stories: A Critique of the Stock Narrative of Feminist Field Formation,” in The
Geopolitics of the Cold War and Narratives of Inclusion (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), 1–33.
130

131

Betty Friedan, It Changed My Life: Writings On The Women's Movement (New York: Random House, 1976).

132

Elaine Hedges selected Sexual Politics, Robin Morgan her own anthology, and Firestone got a shout out. The
other three texts do not appear in the published remarks. See Florence Howe et al., “Books That Changed Our
Lives,” Women’s Studies Quarterly 19, no. 3/4 (1991): 8–29.
Beverly Guy Sheftall, “Toni Cade Bambara, Black Feminist Foremother,” in Savoring the Salt: The Legacy of
Toni Cade Bambara, ed. Linda Janet Holmes and Cheryl A. Wall (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2007),
115.
133

Gloria Hull, “History/My History,” in Changing Subjects: The Making of Feminist Literary Criticism, ed. Gayle
Greene and Coppélia Kahn (New York: Routledge, 1993), 58.
134

Farah Jasmine Griffin, “Conflict and Chorus: Reconsidering Toni Cade’s The Black Woman: An Anthology,”
in Is It Nation Time?: Contemporary Essays on Black Power and Black Nationalism, ed. Eddie S. Glaude (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2002), 113.
135

136

bell hooks, Remembered Rapture: The Writer at Work (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 2013), 230.

137

Bambara, “On The Issues of Roles,” 104; Patton, “Black People and the Victorian Ethos,” 144.

138

Robinson and Group, “Essay for Black Women in the Cities.”

74

