Journal of
Cultural Analytics

May 13, 2021

Putting the Sorting Hat on J.K. Rowling’s
Reader: A digital inquiry into the age of
the implied readership of the Harry
Potter series
Wouter Haverals, Lindsey Geybels
Wouter Haverals, Lindsey Geybels, University of Antwerp
Peer-Reviewer: J. Berenike Herrmann
Data Repository: 10.7910/DVN/S9C7NN

ABSTRACT
Compared to the large body of research into gender, race and class in children’s literature, there
has been little awareness of the social construction of age in this discourse. Analysing age in
contemporary fiction for young readers gives insight in how present-day society models (people
of) different ages, and given the decisive role that books play in shaping children’s worldviews,
such research contributes to our understanding of how age norms are passed on across
generations. This article explores the construction of age in J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter in
relation to the age of the implied reader. This case study provides a unique opportunity to study
age, because the main characters in every volume ‘grow up’ together with the implied readers.
This article traces the correlation between the evolutions in form and content in J.K. Rowling’s
Harry Potter series on the one hand and an evolution in the age of its implied readership on the
other. After scrutinising existing guidelines pertaining to the ideal age at which to read each
book, we conduct our own digital analyses on the style and topics of the texts. As well as
providing insight into the evolution of these features in the Harry Potter books, this article
contributes to the ongoing discussions on the reliability of readability measures and the
desirability of explicit age markers on books for young readers.

The appeal of J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter series (1997-2007) to an audience of
different ages has contributed to its unparalleled success. At the same time, an aspect
that is often brought up to explain its popularity is that “Harry grew up with his
readers” (e.g. Cresci, 2016). The series seems to be ageless and age-specific at the
same time. In an interview, Rowling stated that she did not start writing the series
with a specific audience in mind: “I wrote something that I knew I would like to read
now, but I also wrote something that I knew I would like to have read at age 10”.1
Harry Potter was thus conceptualized as crossover literature2 from the start, albeit
with a minimum age limit of 10. With a tendency to categorisation, libraries and
bookstores have attempted to refine the individual novels’ implied readerships as the
Journal of Cultural Analytics 5 (2021): 1-30. doi: 10.22148/001c.24077

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

series progressed. However, the suggested age labels often seem arbitrary, or they
contradict one another. Furthermore, Rowling’s self-proclaimed ‘writing-for-all’
stands in contrast with the notion of an evolving readership, which implies a specific
and changing audience for each subsequent volume in the series. As a result, the
implied readership of the Harry Potter series remains largely elusive.
The challenge to gain an understanding of the matter has previously been taken up
by several children’s literature scholars, among which Bettina KümmerlingMeibauer, Kate Behr and Lana Whited. All three have recognized an evolution in
complexity in the Harry Potter series, which they relate to the increasing age of its
readers.3 The current article aims to contribute to this investigation by introducing
techniques from the field of Digital Humanities to the debate. Mainly, our focus will
be on what digital text analysis is able to capture with regard to the age of the implied
reader. The advantage of a digital approach lies in its ability to provide quantitative,
fine-grained analyses of several aspects in multiple books, such as formal
complexity and topical evolutions. The results of these computational analyses are
less sensitive to the subjectivity of a researcher than results obtained by applying
traditional methods such as narratological close reading. However, rather than
substituting one method for another, several quantitative types of analysis in this
article will be supplemented with close reading.
Starting from the observation that texts construct an image of their implied reader,
the computational tools used in this article are aimed at further studying the abovementioned evolution in complexity of the Harry Potter series. The term ‘complexity’
in this case is understood as a combination of the formal difficulty of Rowling’s
writing style and maturity of the topics that are covered. The first will be addressed
by measuring textual complexity through a suite of readability measures, while the
second will be investigated by building interpretable topic models. With some
reservations, the obtained results indeed point towards evidence for an increase in
complexity. We link this to an evolution in the age of the implied reader as the series
progresses, while also reflecting on the limitations and validity of the computational
methods used. Specifically, readability measures will be evaluated as to their
potential to add to the discussion of the age of the implied reader in children’s
literature.

2

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Determining implied age: diverging schemes
In literary studies, a tension exists between different narratological concepts used to
refer to readership. Two concepts that are especially at odds are those of ‘implied
reader’ and ‘real reader’. However, for children’s literature in particular, the
distinction between both is essential, since definitions of the genre often depend on
it. In The Hidden Adult (2008), Perry Nodelman defines children’s literature as
“intended for children”4, while Seth Lerer defines it as literature that is “read by
children”.5 The concept of the ‘implied reader’ is far from being consensual in
narratology. Wolf Schmid defines it as the “image of the recipient that the author
had while writing”.6 However, he acknowledges that the implied reader can have
different functions in literature which leads to different understandings of the
concept. The implied reader can be the “presumed addressee to whom the work is
directed and whose linguistic codes, ideological norms, and aesthetic ideas must be
taken into account if the work is to be understood”.7 When the author is mistaken
about the norms or abilities of this addressee, this persona will not coincide with the
real reader, “the flesh-and-blood person actually reading the text”.8 A second
interpretation of the implied reader coined by Schmid is the “ideal recipient who
understands the work”.9 No longer manifested in the mind of the author, this image
of the ideal reader is created by the work itself. In this article, we will be using the
term ‘implied reader’ according to the second function identified by Schmid because
of two reasons. First, Rowling claims that she wrote the Harry Potter series without
a specific audience in mind. Thus, there is no presumed addressee. Second, not only
did the author intend her books to be read by people of all ages, the series also
attracted real readers of various ages.
These two aspects, the lack of a presumed addressee and the appeal to an audience
of real readers with different ages, are characteristics of “crossover literature” 10.
More so than general literature, crossover literature complicates the endeavour of
researchers investigating implied readership. Moreover, what perspectives are to be
included when talking about ‘implied readership’? Does it solely refer to the age that
the author had in mind while writing? Or does one also take into account the age
labels set by publishing houses? In this respect, Beckett emphasizes the power
publishers have in determining the implied audience of children’s literature.11 She
points out a general tendency in the 1990s, the decade in which the first three

3

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

instalments of Harry Potter were published, to explicitly market book series as
directed to all ages.12 However, this did not happen with the first book, Harry Potter
and the Philosopher’s Stone (1997), as potential publishers understood it to be aimed
specifically at children. Most of them rejected the manuscript because – at ca. 90,000
words – they deemed it too long to be a children’s book. After several rejections, the
editorial director of Bloomsbury’s children’s division recommended the book.13 The
initial reception further highlighted its young audience. An early review of the first
book in The Scotsman (28 June 1997) described Rowling as “a first-rate writer for
children”.14 One of the only explicit age markers found on a Harry Potter book is a
1998 Smarties Book prize ‘sticker’ – although printed – on the cover of the first
paperback edition of Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (1998), stating that
the book won the Gold Award in the ‘9-11 Age Category’.15 However, the crossover
success of the series proved that not all power with regard to determining the age of
the implied reader lies with the publisher. After Bloomsbury picked up on the
enthusiasm people of different ages showed for the series, they ceased at specifically
marketing the books to a young audience.
Although the original British editions of the series do not explicitly state an age
range, and Rowling herself does not disclose any information about the age of her
target audience, various institutions do offer age labels or ranges for the series’
implied readership. These guidelines, however, do not always conform to one
another. We have selected four sets of guidelines to compare in order to explore how
different institutions categorize books as a method for understanding implied
readership. One of them is Common Sense Media (CSM), a web portal developed
to provide trustworthy information about media in general. CSM collects user-based
age ratings and reviews to guide parents and teachers in their choice of entertainment
for children. Furthermore, CSM provides ratings by experts based on specific
content and overall guidelines informed by child development principles.16
According to CSM, the Harry Potter series can be divided into three categories,
lopping together books 1 to 3, marking them “for younger kids” of ages 7 to 9, and
books 4 to 6, for readers aged 10 to 11 as these “books get more intense”. The final
book is categorised separately, for children of 12 and above because these “kids can
probably handle everything J.K. Rowling sends their way”.17 CSM’s categorisation
is closely connected to the real reader, since it takes into account reviews of both
individual adults and children who have read the books. Other institutions focus
4

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

more on the ideal recipient, the image of the reader created by the text itself, before
it is received by the public.
Instead of putting a numerical age marker on children’s books, contemporary
English-language publishers often provide guidelines based on the presumed reading
ability. For this purpose, publishing houses can resort to the well-established Lexile
framework, which rates texts according to reading comprehension, ranging from 0L
to 2000L.18 These values correspond to grade levels and can therefore be converted
to age ranges. Figure 1 includes the age ranges corresponding to the Lexile scores
that are proposed for the Harry Potter books. Interestingly, although the exact Lexile
values differ for the individual books, they all appear to be in line with the supposed
reading abilities of fourth and fifth graders. This suggests that the entire series can
be read by children aged nine to eleven.19 These observations will be compared to
our own analyses.
The country of publication makes a great difference in the determination of the age
of the implied reader. First, the American publishing house of the Harry Potter series
– Scholastic – does include an explicit age marker on one of the books. The dust
jacket of the fourth novel, Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (2000) reads: ‘A New
York Public Library Book for the Teen Age’.20 Scholastic further provides a
categorisation of the series according to grade level on their website, which provides
teaching tools.21 Second, the Central File of Children’s Books (Centraal Bestand
Kinderboeken – CBK)22 holds records for almost all Dutch fiction for young readers
as well as a large collection of children’s books in other languages including English,
French, German and Italian. This database is unique in its kind considering its
approximated total size of 400,000 titles, as well as its large collection of data on
children’s literature in the aforementioned languages, original and translated.
Especially useful for librarians and researchers are the meta-data provided for each
title, including age labels. Since it is more customary in Dutch-speaking countries to
put explicit age markers on books published for children than in English-speaking
countries, CBK is able to record this valuable information in their catalogue. The
age-categorisation CBK attributes to the Harry Potter series is included in Figure 1
as well.

5

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

Figure 1. Age of the implied reader of the Harry Potter series as recorded by Centraal Bestand Kinderboeken
(CBK), Common Sense Media (CMS), Lexile, and the series’ American publishing house, Scholastic.

The age ranges determined by CSM, Lexile, Scholastic and the CBK show a clear
overall progression, but also some differences. According to three of the four
institutions, the age of the implied reader increases as the series progresses.
However, they disagree on both the lower age limit and the pace at which the implied
reader evolves. There is an overlap in the guidelines of Scholastic and CBK for the
first three books, which are, by their standards, suitable for children aged nine to
twelve. Lexile does not suggest a straightforward increase. Instead, it shows a more
fluctuating trajectory between the ages of nine and eleven. Figure 1 also displays
that there is a great deal of variety with regard to the age spans each authority adopts.
While CBK and Lexile adhere to stable spans of respectively four and two years,
CSM and Scholastic record more variable age spans. In short, not only do different
authorities disagree on the numerical age recommendation for the Harry Potter
series, their views on pace at which the age evolves and the appropriate age span
also diverge.
The observations above suggest that putting a numerical age marker on children’s
books, or other media for that matter, is not a straightforward or unproblematic
matter. The processes and necessity to do so are the subject of much debate (see
Nikolajeva 1996, De Vriend 2006, Fastenau 2014). Stephen Krashen (2001) even
6

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

considers the Lexile measure “unnecessary and potentially harmful.”23 The
remainder of this article will acknowledge the variation in the age ranges provided
by the four institutions while adding our own, computationally-aided point of view
to the discussion. What can be concluded, however, is that most guidelines agree
that the age of the implied readership of the books increases as the series unfolds.
The implied reader moves from childhood through adolescence and, according to
two schemes, towards adulthood.
The remainder of this article explores what computational tools designed to assess
textual difficulty can add to the question of Harry Potter’s evolving implied
readership. Because we have no information on the presumed addressee as imagined
by the author, the term ‘implied reader’ will henceforth be used to refer to the ideal
recipient of the work as determined by the text itself. The aim is not to determine
absolute age ranges for the series’ implied readership, but rather to investigate
whether the evolution suggested by the guidelines above is reflected in
computationally-aided analyses of readability and topics. Moreover, by comparing
several ways in which this type of analysis can be conducted, this article adds to the
critical reflection on the validity of readability measures.

Determining implied age: digital analyses
The correlation of the age of the implied reader and readability of children’s
literature has already received scholarly interest, often in connection with literacy
and education (see Meyer 1975, Fry 2002, Yi Ma and Loftus 2012). In this section,
analyses are aimed at answering the following question: Do the Harry Potter books
become more difficult to read in terms of syntax and semantics? 24 The selection of
available digital analyses we made is informed by a paper by Wanner et al. (2011)
in which the writers present and evaluate a tool for assessing age suitability of
books.25 Their tool combines story complexity, emotions, physical aspects, difficulty
of writing style and topics. This article will focus on the last two. First, we look into
formal features to examine the complexity of the Harry Potter series. In this respect,
the average sentence length of each book is calculated as well as the number of
subordinate clauses as a syntactic base for textual difficulty.26 Next, lexical diversity
will be studied by resorting to Moving Average Type-Token Ratio (MATTR). To
conclude the formal analyses, this article will compare several readability formulas,

7

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

or measures that aspire to determine the minimum reading level needed to
comprehend a text. In the last section of the article, previous analyses will be
complemented by an exploration of the content of the Harry Potter series by use of
topic modelling. The ultimate goal is thus to trace a possible connection between
formal and content-related evolutions on the one hand and the increasing age of the
implied reader on the other.

Form in the series
Sentences
We first look for an evolution of the formal features in the series. Doing so, we start
by looking at sentence length which, according to Colleen Lennon and Hal Burdick,
is “the best predictor of the difficulty of a sentence”, and by extension of a text. 27
The average sentence length of the Harry Potter series as a whole is slightly less
than twelve words (11.97 to be precise, s=1.16).28 This is almost one word less than
the average sentence length of J.K. Rowling’s fiction written for an adult readership
(12.78, s=0.61). An examination of the individual books (Figure 2) indicates a slight
shift in the average sentence length between the first three volumes in the Harry
Potter series on the one hand, and the series’ subsequent volumes on the other. In
order to potentially explain these differences, we examined the ratio between
character speech and narration29 and found that there is less direct speech in the first
three volumes (averaging 37%) when compared to the rest of the series (averaging
39%). However, calculating the average sentence length of both types (character
speech/narration) for the entire series showed that narration passages have on
average 5.5 more words per sentence. The ratio of direct to indirect speech does not
influence the average sentence length of the books.

8

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 2. Sentence length of each book in the Harry Potter series and J.K. Rowling’s adult fiction (ordered by
publication date). Average sentence length is represented by a white dotted line.

Although sentence length is an important factor in assessing the difficulty of a text,
it would be imprudent to consider it as a straightforward reference point for the age
of the implied reader. After all, sentence length and text complexity are not
necessarily directly proportional.30 The underlying syntactic structures of longer
sentences are much more indicative. Bailin and Grafstein point out that sentences
with a deeper syntactic structure are more complex.31 Especially when a subordinate
clause is nested within another subordinate clause, this adds to a sentence’s
complexity, and thus requires stronger reading skills. Figure 3 shows for each book
the proportion of sentences with at least one and more than two subordinate
clauses.32 As the series progresses, the number of sentences with at least one
subordinate clause increases. These types of sentences were found to be positively
correlated with the series’ progression (Pearson’s r=.83, p=.02). Particularly striking
is the gap between the two extremes: the proportion of sentences with at least one
subordinating clause in HP2 is 37.87%, whereas in HP6 this ratio lies at 63.19%. An
increase in formal difficulty can also be observed in the number of sentences which
contain two or more subordinate clauses. Between these more complex sentences

9

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

and the progression of the series, a positive correlation was also found (r=.81,
p=.03).

Figure 3. Ratio of sentences per novel that contains subordinate clauses. Syntactic structure was analysed using the
Berkley Neural Parser (Kitaev, Cao & Klein 2018).

Lexical diversity
Another formal feature that influences the complexity of a text is lexical diversity, a
textual feature identified by Victoria Johansson to successfully detect differences
between readers in different age groups.33 Lexical diversity represents the
vocabulary richness of a text, most frequently measured by the so-called type-token
ratio (TTR), which refers to the ratio of unique words – types – to the total number
of words – tokens – in a text.34 TTR outputs a number between 0 and 1; the higher
the number, the more types a particular text contains. However, a notorious
shortcoming of TTR is its susceptibility to text length (i.a. McCarthy & Jarvis 2007).
The more words a book contains, the more previously used words will reappear,
lowering the TTR-score. Therefore, instead of TTR, we picked a measure that serves
our goal: determining the lexical diversity of the vocabulary of the individual Harry
Potter books, regardless of their unequal lengths.35 Ideally suited for this purpose is
Moving Average Type-Token Ratio (MATTR), developed by Covington and
McFall (2010). It is calculated by taking the average TTR value for overlapping
10

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

segments (with a fixed length) of a text. For our calculation we set the segment
length to 10000 words.36 Figure 4 shows the MATTRs per book for the Harry Potter
series and Rowling’s novels for adults. Noticeably, the ratios are unaffected by the
lengths of the books: the second shortest book in the series (HP2, 85071 tokens
without punctuation) has the highest MATTR (.209), whereas the lowest score (.188)
is recorded for the shortest book (HP1, 76440 tokens without punctuation). As the
differences in the MATTR-scores for the books are slight, it is premature to link
these results to an advancement of the age of implied reader of the series.
Notwithstanding this result, a remarkable observation can be made when comparing
the MATTR-scores of the Harry Potter series (mean at .20 ± .001) to those of the
novels written for an adult audience (mean at .24 ± .001). From Figure 4, we learn
that MATTR-scores for the adult novels are consistently above the overall average
(.22 ± .0007). Lexical diversity is relatively stable throughout the Harry Potter
series; no correlation was found between MATTR and the order in which the books
appeared. Thus, in terms of lexical diversity no evolution in complexity was found.

Figure 4. MATTR scores for the individual books in the Harry Potter series and Rowling’s adult novels. Calculated
using a 10000-word window size. The novels appearing on the x-axis are ordered chronologically. The red line shows
the mean (.22).

11

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

Readability
Although the analyses above reveal aspects of the evolution of the books’
complexity, it remains challenging to interpret them in terms of the age of the
implied reader. Formulas that do aspire to such a correlation are referred to as
‘readability formulas’. They aim to provide an estimate of the minimum reading
skills required to understand a particular text. In their tool to assess age suitability,
Wanner et al. (2011) include the calculation the Automated Readability Index (ARI).
This readability test was developed by R.J. Senter and E.A. Smith in 1967 and
combines information on the number of characters, words and sentences in a text.37
However, Wanner et al.’s choice to integrate specifically ARI remains
unsubstantiated. After all, there exist numerous, well-established readability
formulas, which have been broadly applied to literature. Especially teachers have
relied on readability formulas for decades to analyse children’s literature and
textbooks.38 Librarians use them to aid visitors in their search for suitable reading
materials.39 Crossley et al. (2019) note that the wide use of these ‘classic’ formulas
contrasts with the limitations in their function to determine reading levels partly due
to their lack of construct validity and because they seem to be less accurate on data
other than the data they were trained on. In his discussion of readability formulas,
he refers to a study he conducted in 2017 in which he demonstrated the benefit of
readability formulas that use "features that measure lexical and syntactic constructs,
text cohesion, sentiment, topic analysis and semantics”.40
In order to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of how different readability
formulas assess the age of the implied reader, we will not limit ourselves to the
application of just one formula. Rather, we chose to expand our analysis of the
readability of the Harry Potter series with five more formulas. This enables us to
compare individual formulas and evaluate the use of readability scores to study
children’s literature. Next to the ARI, other popular readability measures are
Gunning fog, Dale-Chall, the Simple Measure of Gobbledygook (SMOG), the
Coleman-Liau Index and the Flesch-Kincaid formula.41 These formulas output a
value that corresponds to the reading abilities of a student within the U.S. grade level
system. Table 1 provides a conversion chart for these grades to the respective ages
of students.

12

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Grade

Age

Grade

Age

3

8-9

8

13-14

4

9-10

9

14-15

5

10-11

10

15-16

6

11-12

11

16-17

7

12-13

12

17-18

Table 1. Conversion chart for U.S. grade levels and student ages.

Since the above-mentioned measures offer a purely formal analysis of readability
(rather than taking into account the content or thematic aspects or any form of
empirical analysis such as reading speed), they are often heavily criticized.42 It
should be stressed, though, that in the current study readability measures are not
being used to cast in stone a text’s suitability for a particular age group. After all, we
are well aware that a novel’s readability does not solely depend on formal features.
Rather, we aim to investigate whether the established readability formulas are
sensitive to a potential evolution with regard to the complexity of the Harry Potter
series, thus reflecting a tendency for a shift in the age of the implied reader.
Figure 5 shows the scores obtained for the above-mentioned readability formulas
directly translated to the U.S. grade scale.43 For this purpose, each novel was divided
into samples of 200 consecutive sentences. Next, 25 samples were selected at
random for which the readability scores were calculated. From a general outlook, it
appears that readability scores gradually rise as the series progresses. Based on the
results, both the SMOG score and Gunning fog correlate most strongly to the
publication chronology (Kendall’s =.39, p<.001). Flesch-Kincaid (τ=.31), ARI
(τ=.28) and Coleman-Liau (τ=.25) all exhibit moderate positive correlations
(p<.001). It should be noted, though, that the aforementioned readability formulas
also correlate very strongly with each other (τ ranges from .65 to .88, p<.001). This
should come as no surprise as most formulas exploit the same textual features to
arrive at a result (such as average sentence length, word counts, word length, etc.).
Only the Dale-Chall formula correlates less strongly with the other formulas (τ
ranges from .15 to .34, p<.001). Unlike the other formulas, the Dale-Chall formula
13

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

is unique because of its use of a word list containing ca. 3000 words recognized by
80% of fourth graders. This way, the number of difficult words in a passage (i.e.
words that are not on the list) is factored into the formula, making it more advanced
and more predictive of readability than formulas resorting to word length (e.g.
SMOG, Gunning fog, Flesch-Kincaid).44 As the Dale-Chall formula is vocabularybased, it closely resembles the Lexile measure, created and owned by the company
MetaMetrics and used by publishing houses including Scholastic to provide their
books with readability scores.
From the averages in Figure 5 (white dashed line), we learn that the first book is
scored as the most readable across all formulas. This result runs parallel to the
analysis of MATTR scores (Figure 4). The highest average readability scores are
recorded for HP6 and HP5, followed by HP7. One factor that might influence the
slight decrease in readability from the sixth book to the final book might be the ratio
between character speech and narration. There is less direct speech in the last book
(39%) when compared to the previous one (44.5%). As established in our analysis
of sentence length, narration has on average longer and more complex sentences
than character speech. Almost all readability formulas identify a rise in readability
between books one and six (except for Dale-Chall).
Remarkably, the grade level estimates produced by the different formulas are in
some cases far apart. Most noticeably, this can be observed for Flesch-Kincaid and
Dale-Chall. While Flesch-Kincaid suggests that HP1 is suitable for third graders
(ages 8 to 9), Dale-Chall sets the readability level at the eighth grade (ages 13 to 14).
It is likely that this is caused by the variables used in both formulas. While FleschKincaid takes into account syllable, word and sentence counts, Dale-Chall is based
on word counts, syllable counts, and the ratio of difficult words as recorded in a list.
The observed variation between readability measures is also what sparks criticism.45
While these variations make it undesirable to use readability measures to put reliable
grade levels on the books, there is relative agreement about the directionality of the
increase of complexity. This supports research pointing out that sentence length and
word difficulty are viable features for estimating textual difficulty, even though
imperfect.46

14

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 5. Readability formulas applied to 25 200-sentence samples taken from the individual books in the Harry
Potter series.

Similar discrepancies can also be identified if we look at the age attributions set by
recognised institutions. Table 2 provides an overview of the recommended age
ranges for each Harry Potter book as well as the age ranges determined by the
readability scores. From this table, we learn that while age recommendations by the
institutions don’t match up perfectly with those suggested by readability formulas,
both indicate an increase in the age of the implied reader. A drawback in this respect
is the intent of readability formulas to target a single, specific grade level, while the
institutions often suggest age recommendations spanning more than one grade. From
Figure 5, we also learn that, interestingly, all readability scores drop for the final
book in the Harry Potter series. However, only the Lexile framework shows a
decrease in the age of the implied reader. All other organisations report an increase.
This suggests that the recommendations of CSM, Scholastic and CBK are not based
solely on formal analyses and readability of the texts, as suggested in their
introduction above. Although the organisations themselves are not clear about this,
it would appear that, in addition to formal characteristics, content and/or thematic
elements are also taken into account. To further investigate the discrepancy for HP7
between our analyses and the four institutions, but also to complement the strictly
15

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

formal analysis by a semantic one we will assess the content of the books in the next
section.
HP1

HP2

CSM
LEXILE

HP3

7-9
9-10

10-11

GUNNING
FOG

10-11

ALL*

10-11

11-18

10-11
12-13

12-13

13-14

12-13
13-14

10-14

15-18

9-10

11-12

DALE-CHALL

9-10

9-10

11-12

SMOG

HP7
12-15

12-15

8-9

8-9

HP6

9-14

9-12

FLESCHKINCAID

COLEMANLIAU

9-10

9-12

CBK

HP5
10-11

SCHOLASTIC

ARI

HP4

12-13

13-14
14-15

11-12

12-13

Table 2. Age ranges for each Harry Potter book corresponding to the examined readability formulas. *The final row
(‘All’) contains the corresponding age ranges if we were to aggregate all the readability scores across all formulas.

From childlike to mature topics
After analysing the evolution of formal characteristics of the Harry Potter series, we
look at topics which decrease or increase over the course of the series. For these
analyses, topic modelling is used.47 The analysis of topics is one of the components
Crossley et al. (2019) propose to include in new, improved readability formulas.
16

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Topic modelling fits into the field of distributional semantics and is thus concerned
with the subject matter of documents, examining what is written in a text as opposed
to how it is written. Topic models generate clusters of words that frequently appear
together (word co-occurrence). The meaning of a word can be approximated by
looking at its context. First the topic model is “trained” on a large corpus, in this case
The Books Corpus,48 to identify word clusters.49 The number of topics identified by
the model has a strong influence on the results. To accommodate this variation, the
model was trained three times; with 100, 200 and 300 allowed topics. Next, these
word clusters, or topics, were tested on the Harry Potter series, divided into their
original chapters and pre-processed to retain only content words, to see to what
extent each topic is present.50 In practice, this means that 199 chapters each received
the same number of scores as there are topics trained in the model.
To identify the topics that increase or decrease most significantly throughout the
series, the Kendall rank correlation coefficient, Kendall’s Tau, is calculated for each
topic. This statistical test represents how consistently a score decreases or increases.
A set of scores with no clear pattern, and thus not interesting to our analyses, will
not receive a significant Kendall’s Tau. The result from applying the statistical test
is a list of top increasing or decreasing topics. It is important to note that topic models
only create clusters of words that are semantically closely related; reliably labelling
these clusters in most cases requires human input. Consequently, the interpretative
phase of topic modelling is more prone to bias than the analytical phase. To minimise
a subjective reading of the topics provided by the Kendall’s Tau test,
Table 3 presents the results of all three versions of the topic model. Five words are
given as examples for each topic. These are not necessarily words that are present in
the Harry Potter books, but rather the topmost characteristic words for the topics
based on the background corpus. This is clear in topic 6 of the most decreasing out
of 100 topics, which can be attribute to the large amount of fan fiction included in
the Books Corpus.

17

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

Topic 1

Topic 2

Topic 3

Topic 4

Topic 5

Topic 6

game

class

doctor

kitchen

shit

team

school

hospital

bathroom

gon

puppy

ball

teacher

nurse

bedroom

ass

cat

play

students

patient

shower

whispered

animals

players

classroom

patients

stairs

babe

school

class

cat

game

dog

year

teacher

cats

team

puppy

envelope

college

students

animals

ball

pet

read

summer

classroom

animal

play

animal

paper

grade

classes

shelter

players

tail

Decrease dog
(300
Topics) pet

food

class

game

school

candy

eat

classes

ball

football

chocolate

tail

plate

classroom

play

grade

tickets

barking

eating

lunch

players

teachers

cookies

fur

meal

today

baseball

college

cookie

wedding

soldiers

tears

replied

wife

church

dress

soldier

loved

answered

husband

altar

Decrease dog
(100
Topics) dogs

Decrease letter
(200
Topics) letters

Increase
(100
Topics)

18

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Increase
(200
Topics)

marry

military

whispered

exclaimed daughter

soul

married

tent

cry

explained

married

souls

bride

riffle

crying

shouted

marriage

angels

death

army

truth

sword

daughter

mage

died

war

blade

husband

ivory

die

battle

conversati
on

swords

daughters

silver

killed

enemy

hilt

birth

pack

alive

troops

dagger

age

healing

nature

daughter

feelings
tone
trust

Increase
(300
Topics)

ring

death

answered

tones

finger

died

stated

gentleman social

daughters

diamond

funeral

explained

demanded order

birth

group

fear

course

age

responded

features

knowledge

parent

engageme die
nt
grave
rings

Table 3. Top six increasing and decreasing topics in the Harry Potter series as identified by a topic model trained to
distinguish between 100, 200 and 300 topics.

When looking at the results of the top six decreasing topics, all three models identify
topics related to animals, sports and school. The presence of animals in fiction is
traditionally connected to literature for children. In her discussion on fictive
characters, Maria Nikolajeva (2002) connects nonhuman characters, including
animals, to childhood.51 Animals play a larger part in the first books because of the

19

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

introduction and diversity of magical creatures to which less attention is paid in the
later volumes. For example, an important part of first-year students’ school
experience is choosing a pet. In Figure 6 this thematization can be observed. The
graph is a visualisation of the Kendall’s Tau slope resulting from the topic model
trained on 300 topics. The graph is plotted using a rolling window of 35 chapters to
stabilise the scores of each topic; the graph starts in the middle of this window, at
chapter 17, which corresponds to the beginning of the second book and thus no data
is shown for HP1. The trend line of the topic on dogs (dog pet tail barking fur) is
high at the start of HP2, most probably influenced by the presence of a three-headed
dog at the end of HP1, and peaks in HP3 due to the thematization of the grim figure
of a black dog. According to Behr (2005), the evolution of the topic of magical
details, such as magical creatures and animals, is closely linked to the age of the
implied reader.52 While young readers are drawn to these details of the marvellous
wizarding world, the later books lack these topics.
Competitive sports and games are also often mentioned in the first part of the series
and are represented in all three models. Parallel to the importance of magical
creatures, magical games and sports are thematised as part of Harry’s introduction
into the wizarding world. Figure 6 shows a high presence of this topic at the start of
books two and four. From a close reading we learn that the first chapters of the fourth
book are set at the Quidditch World Championship. While Quidditch, the magical
team sport played at the school, continues to feature throughout the series, with the
exception of the last book, the analysis points towards a decrease in the presence of
this and similar activities that feature a clear divide between teams. One reason for
this decrease can be found in Jann Lacoss’ (2002) observation that in the series the
separation into groups, such as Quidditch teams but also schoolhouses, is more
defined in the first books while more mixing occurs in the later books.53 We can
hypothesise from this that group membership is more important and straightforward
for children than it is for adolescents. In later volumes, the topics of sports and
animals are not featured as much in part because the novelty of these magical
elements has worn off and partly because they are overshadowed by more serious
tasks at hand.
All three models present a decrease in the topic of the school setting. The topic model
trained to identify 200 topics even includes two topics related to this evolution in the

20

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

top six of decreasing topics. According to Nikolajeva (2010), the school setting in
the Harry Potter books emphasises the power structure of adult over child.54 The
decrease of this topic as the series progresses indicates a moving away from
childhood and towards adulthood. Figure 6 suggests that this movement is halted in
books five and six, where the presence of the school topic increases before dropping
again in the last book. Based on a close reading of the books, this is an accurate
rendition of the topic, as books five and six focus more on magical education than
the previous and last books.
Furthermore, various scholars (e.g. Nikolajeva 2002) have drawn a parallel between
sexuality in general fiction and food in fiction for children. Food is also one of the
topics decreasing in importance. While it only turns up in one of the models, the one
trained to distinguish between 300 topics, it does so twice in the top six of said
model, once centred around the act of eating and once concerned more with sweets.
The decrease in the topics concerning food, as well as animals, sports and the school
setting, points towards a maturation of the series and consequently an evolution in
its implied readership.

Figure 6. Evolution of the five topics with the steadiest decrease in the Harry Potter series.

21

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

The same conclusion can be drawn from examining the topics that increase in the
Harry Potter series. Although there is more variation between the three trained
models, most topics they identified are linked to a more adolescent or adult
experience. Two models present topics on battle and war; it is also present in the
analysis of the most detailed model (300 topics), but there it falls just short of the
top six. According to J.A. Appleyard (1994) children’s literature is no place for war
and violence. Whereas he observes that good and evil are not clearly separated in
adolescent literature, in children’s literature evil is externalized and overcome.55
Although exceptions to both of Appleyard’s findings can be found in contemporary
children’s literature, Rowling’s series is initially set up to comply with the traditional
convention of a fairly innocent world in which good and evil are distinguished, and
that this world gradually grows more complex. It is true that in the last Harry Potter
book the personification of evil is defeated, but it does not happen without several
losses on the side of good. Another theme that is often featured in adolescent
literature is fear. Behr states that feelings of wonder and innocence make way for
fear and tragedy in the Harry Potter series,56 effectively connecting the decreasing
topics on the magical details of the wizarding world to the increase in the topics of
fear, evil and death. This last theme was also identified as increasing significantly
by two of the topic models and validates the claims of several literature scholars
studying the Harry Potter series that death is one of the main themes of the books
(see i.a. Trites 2001, Cockrell 2002, Behr 2005). Figure 7 shows the topics with the
steadiest increase in the series. Only the top three topics have a large enough increase
to create a meaningful plot. The topic of death has two peaks in the course of the
series: one at the end of HP4 and one beginning in HP6, reaching its highest point at
the end of the series. The first peak correlates with arguably the first major death in
the series and the moment that evil is reborn.
Clearly present in the analyses of increasing topics is the topic of family setting. All
three models include in their top six words such as daughter, husband, wife, birth,
age, and two of them include words associated with marriage. Although there is
indeed a wedding at the start of the last book, the models probably pick up on the
importance of a magic ring featured in the last two books, as observed in one of the
topics of the most detailed model. The family setting is traditionally more associated
with children’s literature, as adolescent characters are often depicted as rebelling
against their family. In the sphere of social relations, there is one topic lacking in the
22

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

later Harry Potter books which we would expect to see in adolescent literature, that
of romantic relationships and sex. Children’s and YA literature scholars including
Appleyard (1994) and Lee Talley (2011) recognise sex as one of the main differences
between both types of fiction. While children are usually shielded from this topic, it
is present in most adolescent literature. The parallel that Nikolajeva (2002) draws
between sexuality in general fiction and food in fiction for children57 is not visible
in the topic model. While topics on food have already been shown to decrease, the
topics included in
Table 3 do not support a complementary increase in sexuality with regards to the
Harry Potter series.
One more interesting observation from the increasing topics is the presence of topics
about conversation. One model has a topic on truth and feelings, which also reflects
Appleyard’s observation of adolescent literature often featuring the “turbulent
emotions of the central characters”.58 The other two models identify topics
characterised by dialogue tags (replied, exclaimed, stated, etc.). A possible
explanation for the increase in words like these is the action-oriented nature of
children’s fiction, while dialogue, reflection and description are associated more
with adolescent or general fiction.59 A different explanation might be that this is an
artefact of the evolution in writing style of the author, that instead of using the
generic ‘said’, Rowling’s description of characters’ speech became more diverse.

23

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

Figure 7. Evolution of the five topics with the steadiest increase in the Harry Potter series; only the top three show a
meaningful evolution.

Conclusion: maturing text, ageing readers
One of the main goals of this article was to trace a possible correlation between the
evolution in the complexity in form and content of the Harry Potter series on the
one hand to the evolution in the age of its implied readership according to various
institutions on the other. Firstly, we established that it is problematic to assign
reading age to the individual Harry Potter books – because of their crossover nature
and the refusal by both the publisher and the author to make explicit assertions.
However, three of the four institutions discussed in this article agree with literary
reviewers and scholars and recognise an evolution in the age of the implied
readership. In the second part of this article, we investigated whether this evolution
can be picked up by a digital analysis of the texts. Although the Harry Potter series
was apparently written without a specific audience in mind and it was quickly
marketed to be suitable for all ages, the analyses conducted in this article were able
to profile to a certain extent an age-dependent implied reader. Both the formal and
topical analyses show a change throughout the Harry Potter series.
24

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

When looking at formal aspects, the average sentence length and number of
subordinate clauses show a rise in difficulty. The increase in lexical diversity is
slight, and lower than that for the novels written for an adult audience. While the
readability formulas show some variation between each other (e.g. a four-year
difference between the ranges determined by Flesh-Kincaid and SMOG for almost
each book), they all support the assumption of increasing difficulty across the series
reported by literature scholars and reviewers as well as the institutional guidelines
discussed. However, the measures indicate only very small changes. While previous
studies into reading abilities of children and English-language learners prove
readability measures to be valuable (especially in educational contexts), this article
complements other research that identifies the concept of ‘readability’ as being too
complex to infer conclusions from the analysis of only one aspect. Adding
complementary formal as well as topical analyses is therefore necessary to get a
richer image of the implied reader. However, while we established the utility of these
analyses on a specific corpus, we remain well aware of the discussion on their
desirability. Further research, conducted on a larger corpus of children’s literature
that does include age markers made explicit by the author or publisher, would
possibly provide a more detailed insight into the validity of the methods employed
in this article to determine a correlation between formal and topical features on the
one hand and the age of the implied reader on the other. Especially interesting would
be to apply these computational tools to the oeuvre of crosswriters who write for
adults as well as children of different ages.
While most of our analyses pick up on a general evolution in complexity in the Harry
Potter series, some results raise questions pertaining to the validity of the
computational tools used. Especially the contradicting results of the analyses
conducted on HP2 signal a problem; while there is a decrease in sentence length and
number of sentences containing subordinate clauses, a higher lexical diversity is
recorded as well as a lack of decrease in the age guidelines either of institutions or
as calculated by readability formulas. The reliability of using topic modelling to
study the age of the implied reader is also debatable. Linking topics to an evolution
as detailed as the small age ranges suggested by the existing schemes is challenging
as it is difficult to connect the presence of certain topics to a narrow age range. There
is no measure for example to determine how much talk about death a reader of a
certain age can deal with. It is also important to note, as illustrated by the presence
25

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

of the keyword ‘ring’ and its possible influence on the topic of marriage, that a close
reading of the texts remains valuable when employing digital tools. Nonetheless, if
we match the evolution of topics with critics’ discussion of children’s and (young)
adult literature, it is clear that there is a general movement from childhood topics to
adolescent or even adult topics. The decrease of topics concerning food, school and
animals combined with the increase in spiritual and morbid themes point to a
maturing of the content of the series. The sudden rise in the topic on ‘death’ in the
last two books might suggest a change in implied readership between these and the
previous books. Butler (2003) recognises an increase in the age, reading levels and
maturity levels of readers as a consequence of the maturing of themes as well as of
fictional characters.60

Notes
1

Quoted in: Philip Nel, J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter Novels: A Reader’s Guide (A&C Black, 2001): 51.

2

Sandra L. Beckett, Crossover Fiction: Global and Historical Perspectives (New York: Routledge, 2009).

3

The exact nature of this relation has been subject to a debate that lies beyond the scope of this article. Bettina
Kümmerling-Meibauer (‘Seriality in Children’s Literature.’ In Clémentine Beauvais and Maria Nikolajeva (Eds.),
The Edinburgh Companion to Children’s Literature (2017): 167-178.) attributes the increase in complexity to the
maturation of the title-character, which she links to the ageing reader, as both effectively ‘grow up’ together. Other
researchers draw a more direct connection between the changing readership of the series and its evolution but do not
agree on the direction of this causal relationship; Sandra Beckett (2009) and Victor Watson (‘Series Fiction.’ In
Peter Hunt (Ed.), International Companion Encyclopedia of Children’s Literature (2004): 532-541.) believe that the
series’ growing success with adult readers and the original child readers growing up led to an evolution in content
while Rebecca Butler (2003) states that the change in content precedes the change in readership.
Nodelman, Perry. The Hidden Adult: Defining Children’s Literature (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
2008): 20. Further complicating the matter, is the fact that the intended audience of children’s books is traditionally
determined by adult mediators involved in their production and distribution to the child reader. Mostly, the authors’
involvement in this decision is limited since age markers are usually discussed with or even imposed upon their
work by publishers, booksellers, literary critics or librarians.
4

Seth Lerer, Children’s Literature: A Reader’s History, from Aesop to Harry Potter (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2009): 11.
5

Wolf Schmid, “Implied Reader,” The Living Handbook of Narratology (2014). https://www.lhn.unihamburg.de/node/59.html.
6

7

Ibid.

Gerald Prince, “Reader,” Peter Hühn et al. (Eds.) Handbook of Narratology (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2009):
404.
8

9

Schmid, “Implied Reader”.

26

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

10

Crossover literature, in its most broad definition, includes texts that were written, published and marketed for a
specific audience but widely read and adopted by readers of a different age.
11

Beckett, Crossover Fiction, 181–87.

12

Ibid., 196.

13

Julia Eccleshare, A Guide to the Harry Potter Novels (London: Continuum, 2002): 7–8.

14

Lindsey Fraser, The Scotsman, June 28, 1997.

15

Philip W. Errington, J.K. Rowling: A Bibliography 1997-2013 (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2015): 46.

“How We Rate and Review,” Common Sense Media, July 28, 2020, https://www.commonsensemedia.org/aboutus/our-mission/about-our-ratings.
16

“Harry Potter Age-by-Age Guide,” Common Sense Media, July 28, 2020,
https://www.commonsensemedia.org/blog/harry-potter-age-by-age-guide.
17

18

The value of the Lexile Measures is based on sentence length and word frequency, which are measures for
syntactic and semantic difficulty respectively (Lennon and Burdick, 2004: 4).
19

Derived from data on: https://hub.lexile.com/find-a-book/search and https://hub.lexile.com/lexile-grade-levelcharts. The Lexile scores for the individual books in the Harry Potter serries are (chronologically): 880L, 940L,
880L, 880L, 950L, 920L and 880L.
20

Errington, J.K. Rowling, 207.

21

https://www.scholastic.com/teachers/teaching-tools/book-lists/the-complete-harry-potter-book-list.html#

22

https://picarta.oclc.org/psi/xslt/DB=3.34/

23

Stephen Krashen, "The Lexile Framework: Unnecessary and Potentially Harmful," CSLA Journal 24.2 (2001):
25–26.
24

The analyses in this article are conducted on the digital edition Rowling, J.K. Harry Potter: The Complete
Collection (2007), published by Bloomsbury. This edition contains corrections the publisher made to the texts in
2004. A complete overview of these corrections can be found here: https://www.hp-lexicon.org/differences-changestext/
25

Franz Wanner et al., "Are My Children Old Enough to Read These Books? Age Suitability Analysis," Polibits 43
(2011): 93–100.
26

Alan Bailin and Ann Grafstein, Readability: Text and Context (London: Palgrave Mcmillan, 2016): 65-80.

27

Colleen Lennon and Hal Burdick, "The Lexile Framework as an Approach for Reading Measurement and
Success" (2004): 5.
28

For this calculation, the English-dedicated sentence and word tokenizer of SpaCy (version 2.2.4, https://spacy.io)
was used. In this regard, it is worth mentioning that direct speech of the type “Yes,” said Harry. is considered as a
single sentence, containing 3 words. For the purpose of tokenization at the word-level, all non-alphanumeric
characters were discarded.
The larger research project of which the current study is a part, tracks the construction of age in children’s
literature. One of the features that are studied is direct speech of fictional characters, attributed with the
29

27

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

corresponding age of the relevant character by manual annotation. The data pertaining to the ratio between direct
and indirect speech in the Harry Potter series is derived from these annotations.
30

Bailin and Grafstein, Readability, 13.

31

Ibid, 65–80.

32

The syntactic structure analysis was performed using the Berkley Neural Parser (Kitaev, Nikita, and Dan Klein,
‘Constituency Parsing with a Self-Attentive Encoder.’ In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Volume 1, Melbourne (2018)), which parses sentences using neural networks and
self-attention. The model used in this analysis (benepar_en2) incorporates BERT word representations and achieves
95.17 F1 on the Penn Treebank.
Victoria Johansson, “Lexical Diversity and Lexical Density in Speech and Writing: A Developmental
Perspective,” Working Papers 53 (2008): 61–79.
33

34

Wendell Johnson, "Studies in Language Behavior: A Program of Research," Psychological Monographs 56.2
(1944): 1–15; Mildred C. Templin, Certain Language Skills in Children; Their Development and Interrelationships
(Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press, 1957).
35

Minimizing the effect of text length in order to gain insight into lexical richness has been the goal of many
researchers within the field of vocabulary studies. Various alternative proposals have been made to replace TTR, or
at least to accommodate for its drawbacks (Philip McCarthy and Scott Jarvis, “vocd: A Theoretical and Empirical
Evaluation,” Language Testing 24.4 (2007): 459-488. and Kristopher Kyle, “Measuring Lexical Richness,” in Stuart
Webb (Ed.) The Routledge Handbook of Vocabulary Studies (2019): 454-476. provide a non-exhaustive overview of
such proposals). For the purpose of this article, it would lead us too far to investigate and apply all these alternative
measures to the Harry Potter books.
36

This means that we first calculate the TTR value for the segment of each book running from word 1 through
10000. Next, we calculate TTR for the subsequent window, which runs from word 2 through 10001, and so on.
Once the TTR scores have been calculated for all segments that make up a book, we calculate the average score. As
pointed out by Covington & McFall (“Cutting the Gordian Knot: The Moving-Average Type-Token Ratio
(MATTR),” Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 17.2 (2010): 94-100.), the calculation of MATTR varies with the
chosen window size. For the purpose of determining the vocabulary size of an author, Covington and McFall
recommend a window size as large as 10000 words (Covington & McFall, 2010: 97). The calculation of MATTR
was performed, using ‘lexical-diversity’, a package for Python developed by Kristopher Kyle
(https://github.com/kristopherkyle/lexical_diversity).
37

Concretely, the ARI (1967) is calculated as follows: 4.71 * (number of characters / number of words) + 0.5 *
(number of words / number of sentences) – 21.43.
Edgar A. Smith, Edgar and R.J. Senter, “Automated Readability Index,” Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories
(1967): 1–14.
38

E. Fry, “Readability versus leveling,” The Reading Teacher 56.3 (2002): 286-272.

A. Schade, “The little read writing book: 20 powerful principles for structure,
style, and readability,” Library Journal, 129.13 (2004): 91.
39

Scott A. Crossley et al., “Moving Beyond Classic Readability Formulas: New Methods and New Models,”
Journal of Research in Reading 42 (2019): 3.
40

41

Gunning fog: Robert Gunning, The Technique of Clear Writing (McGraw-Hill, 1952);
Dale-Chall (original formula): Edgar Dale and Jeanne S. Chall, "A Formula for Predicting Readability:
Instructions," Educational Research Bulletin (1948): 37–54;
Dale-Chall (revised version): Edgar Dale and Jeanne S. Chall, Readability Revisited: The New Dale-Chall
Readability Formula (1995);

28

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

SMOG: G. Harry McLaughlin, “SMOG Grading: A New Readability Formula,” Journal of Reading 12.8 (1969):
639–46;
Coleman-Liau Index: Meri Coleman and T.L. Liau, “A Computer Readability Formula Designed for Machine
Scoring,” Journal of Applied Psychology 60.2 (1975): 283–84;
Flesch-Kincaid formula: J. Peter Kincaid et al., “Derivation of New Readability Formulas (Automated Readability
Index, Fog Count, and Flesch Reading Ease Formula) for Navy Enlisted Personnel,” Research Branch Report 8-75
(1975).
42

Reading speed is one of the components Crossley includes in his study of alternatives to classic readability
measures (Crossley, “Moving Beyond Classic Readability Formulas”.)
See i.a. Bertram Bruce, A. Rubin & K. Starr, “Why readability formulas fail,” IEEE Transactions on Professional
Communication, PC-24 (1981): 50-52;
Karen A. Schriver, “Readability formulas in the new millennium: what’s the use?,” ACM Journal of Computer
Documentation 24.3 (2000): 138–140.
The calculation of readability scores was performed using ‘readability’, a package for Python developed by
Andreas van Cranenburgh (https://github.com/andreasvc/readability/).
43

44

H. Mesmer, Tools for matching readers to texts. Research-based practices (Guilford Press, 2008): 26-27.

T. M. Duffy, “Readability formulas: What's the use?,” in: T. M. Duffy and R. M. Waller (eds.), Designing Usable
Texts (New York: Academic Press, 1985): 113-143.
45

46

Mesmer, Tools for matching readers to texts. Research-based practices, 26.

47

The code for this section of the article was developed by and in close collaboration with Mike Kestemont
(University of Antwerp). Any mistakes or errors are our own. The code uses Python 3.6+ and has the following
major dependencies: spaCy, numpy, sci-kit learn, pandas, lxml and SciPy.
48

Yukun Zhu et al., "Aligning Books and Movies: Towards Story-like Visual Explanations by Watching Movies
and Reading Books," ArXiv (2015).
This corpus, which is free to use for non-commercial research purposes, consists of self-published, novel-length
fiction. The advantage of using this corpus to train a topic model with which to analyse the Harry Potter series is that
it is contemporary, as opposed to the mostly historical work, free of copyright, that is often used in digital text
analysis research. However, the self-published nature of these texts will result in stylistic differences to fiction that is
mediated by publishers.
49

Because this analysis is purely semantic, both the background corpus and the text of the series under investigation
were pre-processed. The part-of-speech tagging feature of SpaCy was applied to the text to retain only the content
words (nouns, verbs and adjectives). To further refine this schematic, a value of significance is given to each word.
Terms that occur in fewer documents have a more specific semantics and thus receive a higher significance score.
This weighted representation (TF-IDF model) is then used as data to build the topic model itself, using NonNegative Matrix Factorization (NMF) as opposed to the equally popular Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) method
(see Mehdiyev et al. 2019). Both algorithms use the same input, but we favour the NMF method for this application
as it is more stable in terms of parameter settings. We favour the NMF method for this application as it is more
stable in terms of parameter settings. The model is trained by running through a fixed number of iterations in which
it does two things. First the model calculates topic scores for each document based on the words it contains. These
scores are then used to try and reconstruct the original words in the document. With each iteration, the model
becomes more accurate.
50

Dividing the series into chapters and putting these on a continuous scale presupposes that all instalments are
equally distant from each other. We acknowledge that the variables used in this analysis might not be strictly
continuous.
51

Maria Nikolajeva, The Rhetoric of Character in Children’s Literature (Oxford: Scarecrow Press, 2002).

29

PUTTING THE SORTING HAT ON J .K. ROWLING’S READER

52

Kate Behr, "'Same-as-Difference': Narrative Transformations and Intersecting Cultures in Harry Potter," Journal
of Narrative Theory 35.1 (2005): 117.
Jann Lacoss, “Of Magicals and Muggles: Reversals and Revulsions at Hogwarts,” in Lana Whited (Ed.), The
Ivory Tower and Harry Potter: Perspectives in a Literary Phenomenon (Columbia: University of Missouri Press,
2002): 67-88.
53

54

Maria Nikolajeva, Power, Voice and Subjectivity in Literature for Young Readers (New York: Routledge, 2010).

55

J.A. Appleyard, Becoming a Reader: The Experience of Fiction from Childhood to Adulthood (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1994): 100.
56

Behr, ‘“Same-as-Difference”’, 114.

57

Nikolajeva, The Rhetoric of Character in Children’s Literature, 42.

58

Appleyard, Becoming a Reader, 100.

59

Beckett, Crossover Fiction, 67.

60

Rebecca Butler, "The Literature Continuum: The Harry Potter Phenomenon," School Libraries Worldwide 9.1
(2003): 67.

30

