Journal of
Cultural Analytics

June 30, 2021

“Too isolated, too insular”: American
Literature and the World
Matthew Wilkens
Matthew Wilkens, Cornell University
Peer-Reviewer: Caren Irr, Cameron Blevins
Data Repository: 10.7910/DVN/XXN1UE

ABSTRACT
Are American authors homers? Do they devote too much of their attention to American concerns
and settings? Is American literature as a whole different from other national literatures in its
degree of self-interest? We attempt to answer these questions, and to address related issues of
national literary identity, by examining the distribution of geographic usage in more than
100,000 volumes of American, British, and other English-language fiction published between
1850 and 2009. We offer four principal findings: American literature consistently features
greater domestic attention than does British literature; American literature is, nevertheless,
significantly concerned with global locations; politics and other international conflicts are
meaningful drivers of changing literary attention in American and British fiction alike; and prizenominated books are the only examined subclass of American fiction that has become
significantly more international in the decades after World War II, a fact that may account for
readers’ unfounded perception of a similar overall shift in American literature.

In late September, 2008, shortly before that year’s Nobel prize in literature was
awarded (to Jean-Marie Le Clézio), Horace Engdahl, permanent secretary of the
Swedish Academy, gave an interview to the Associated Press in which he explained
the scarcity of American laureates. The United States, he suggested, is “too isolated,
too insular. They don’t translate enough and don’t really participate in the big
dialogue of literature. That ignorance is restraining.”1 The public response to
Engdahl’s remarks, in the US and elsewhere, was mostly indignant and entirely
predictable. The whole kerfuffle was intense but short lived and, though it continues
to be cited on occasion in connection with the Academy’s perceived failings or
American literature’s purported narrowness of scope, has had little obvious impact
on academic literary studies.2
At the same historical moment -- that is, about a decade ago, during the early years
of the new century -- American literary scholarship was coming to grips with a
related problem. “For too long,” wrote Wai Chee Dimock in her influential Through
Journal of Cultural Analytics 6 (2021): 52-84. doi: 10.22148/001c.25273

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Other Continents (2006), “American literature has been seen as a world apart,
sufficient unto itself, not burdened by the chronology and geography outside the
nation, not making any intellectual demands on that score.”3 The way in which
Engdahl’s phrasing mirrored Dimock’s is striking, but the objects of their analysis
were different. Dimock was describing the reception and analysis of American
literature, not its content. Her point was that American literature had long been more
internationally engaged than the critical traditions descending from F.O.
Matthiessen, Sacvan Bercovitch, or the New Criticism -- traditions that emphasized
the distinctively American character of U.S. writing -- could admit.
In her reorientation of the field toward the global character of literature produced in
the United States, Dimock was not alone. Caroline Levander and Robert S. Levine’s
widely cited collection Hemispheric American Studies appeared a year later; Rachel
Adams’ Continental Divides (2009) reimagined American fiction as part of a
fundamentally integrated North American literary culture two years further on.4
Hewing more closely to the issue Engdahl raised -- that is, to the global content of
American literary texts rather than to their critical reception -- a slew of articles and
books published near the turn of the decade examined the historical ebb and flow of
American literature’s direct engagement with the wider world, finding recent “global
turns” at points ranging from the early Reagan administration (Paul Giles, linking
newer fiction to the “inchoate” national boundaries of the Revolutionary era), to the
mid-1990s (Paul Jay), to the new millennium (Caren Irr, treating the “geopolitical”
novel in particular), to 9/11 (Bruce Robbins).5
There can be little doubt that, whatever the merits and historical determinants of the
long-running nationalist critical understanding of American literature, the rise of
more globally oriented scholarship in the twenty-first century has been a welcome
and fruitful development. And while not all of this work has been even implicitly
invested in an answer to Engdahl’s claim of cultural chauvinism, nearly all of it
raises in one way or another the question of American literature’s collective attempts
to balance domestic with international concerns. It would be useful, then, if it were
possible to assess American literary attention within and beyond the nation, to
compare such attention to that of other national literatures, to track changes in both
facets over historical time, to measure the differences in global investment between
elite and popular US texts, and to gauge the differences between models of national
53

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

literature organized around readers and around writers. What follows is an attempt
to produce new evidence on each of these fronts and to provide an interpretive
framework through which that evidence can be integrated with existing criticism.
Our principal findings are four:
1. American literature favors American spaces. American authors and USpublished books direct a much larger fraction of their geographic attention to
domestic locations than do British authors and UK-published books.
2. US fiction is significantly international. Although the overall level of
domestic attention in American fiction is high and stable over time, there is
nevertheless a significant fraction (30-40%) of American literary attention
directed to locations outside the US.
3. Politics matter. The distribution of foreign locations appears to change most
notably in response to political conflict, especially wars, rivalries, and
decolonial struggles.
4. Prize culture is (a little) different. Books nominated for high-status literary
prizes in the period after World War II are the only subset of American fiction
in which we observe a sustained shift toward greater international attention.
This helps to explain the (mistaken) perception in select literary circles that
American fiction as a whole has become more international in the postwar
period.

Measuring literary-geographic attention
Scholars of literature lack any single, obvious, widely shared, and consistently
applicable criterion by which to assess textual attention to, or investment in, global
affairs. As a result, even facially straightforward cases are likely to provoke at least
some dissensus. This issue, while productive of critical debate, complicates the effort
to measure changes in internationalism across many books -- that is, in literary
cultures -- over long time spans. What is wanted is a textual feature that provides a
countable and consistent (if necessarily imperfect) proxy for what Engdahl called
“insularity.” One such feature is named places; once identified and associated with
geographic information, it becomes possible to measure the fraction of a text’s
geographic attention devoted to locations within and beyond any given nation.

54

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Repeated over many books of diverse origin, the result is a gauge of literary-cultural
internationalism.
The quantitative analysis of literary geography has become well established in recent
years.6 In most cases, including the present study, researchers use named entity
recognition (NER) algorithms to identify word tokens in a given text that refer to
geospatial locations. The location references are then looked up in a gazetteer that
provides hierarchically organized geographic information about them (“Trafalgar
Square” refers to an area at a specific latitude and longitude, with a given spatial
extent, located within London, England, United Kingdom). Some form of error
correction is usually necessary to identify mistakes at the NER stage and to resolve
geographic ambiguities.7 The result is an interpretive reduction of a text to its
directly specified geographic references, as well as a new and explicit embedding of
those references within a known (and typically static) matrix of geopolitical
boundaries.8

A worked example
We and others have discussed at length in previous work the affordances and
limitations of this method.9 But it may be helpful to examine its results in a wellknown instance. Consider Thomas Pynchon’s short novel The Crying of Lot 49
(1966). How, in a readerly sense, is its geographic attention distributed? It is an
American book, set in the United States -- in California, to be more specific, and
split between the northern and southern halves of that state to be even more so. Its
principal settings -- northern Kinneret-Among-The-Pines, southern San Narciso -are fictional but, while one would have a difficult time putting them on a map, their
regional associations are clear enough.
Despite the (almost) strictly domestic American setting of the book, its range of
geographic reference is wider. In an important early scene, Oedipa recalls her time
with Pierce Inverarity in Mazatlán, where she encountered a symbolically significant
painting by Remedios Varo. The Courier’s Tragedy -- the embedded “ill, ill
Jacobean revenge play,” the plot of which is recounted in minute detail and whose
textual status consumes much of Oedipa's investigative efforts -- traverses western
and central Europe, and may have been sourced from the Vatican library. The

55

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

European origins of the Tristero and Thurn and Taxis networks are explored at some
length. Dr. Hilarious, Oedipa’s psychiatrist and a former Nazi intern at Buchenwald,
provides another European link. The Peter Pinguid Society is devoted to resisting
Soviet influence; Mike Fallopian tells the story of its founding via a minor
nineteenth-century naval conflict with Russia. The Paranoids are obsessed with the
Beatles, with London, and with British pop culture in general. The lawyer, Metzger,
starred in a movie about submarine warfare in the Dardanelles. Nefastis is aroused
by China.
These facts of geographic attention do not undo the Americanness of Pynchon’s
novel. But they do indicate some of the ways in which that Americanness is framed
and inflected: it is western in the small-‘w’ sense, reflecting the cultural rise of
California in the postwar years, yet significantly invested in European history and
conflict, with almost no use for either the US east coast or for the global south (both
of which play larger roles in V. and Gravity’s Rainbow).
How well is this readerly sense of the novel’s geography captured by our method?
Consider the results. We find 189 total location mentions in the 1966 Lippincott first
edition. Of these, 173 can be identified with a single nation, of which 112 (64.7%)
fall strictly within the United States. (Non- and supra-national locations such as
“Pacific” or “Europe” are excluded from our calculations of domestic ratios, since
their status is often ambiguous; if we included them as non-domestic locations, the
domestic fractions reported here and throughout this article would be a few points
lower). Of the 112 domestic locations, 65 (58%) are in California. We miss Kinneret
and San Narciso (matched as locations at the NER stage, but excluded at the
geolocation stage, as is true of imaginary locations in general), which together occur
20 times in the novel; if we retained them, the overall domestic fraction would rise
to 69.8% and the California fraction would rise to 66.7%. Among the non-US
locations, the most frequently occurring are Britain (9 times), Italy (9), Belgium (6),
Mexico (6), Germany (5), and the Vatican City (5). All of these are correctly
identified and geolocated, with the exception of “Beaconsfield” (a cigarette brand
that is mentioned twice in the novel and that is erroneously counted in our data as
the British town bearing the same name).

56

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

The Crying of Lot 49 is near the American average in its domestic usage rate. As we
will see in passing later, its use of western European locations is also broadly typical.
The details, of course, are idiosyncratic, but Pynchon’s book is an example of what
an American novel that’s measured to be about 65% domestic might feel like to a
reader. Is this good enough? Is The Crying of Lot 49 really 65% domestic in some
gut-level sense, and are the books that we measure to be 65% domestic in their
geographic usage really about two-thirds domestic when measured on that same,
impressionistic scale? I’m not sure that this is a generally answerable question, but
it’s worth pointing out that our metric clearly captures more than first-order setting.
The above caveat notwithstanding, the method does generally provide a reliable
indication of setting in the sense that the single most frequently occurring nation
aligns with the human-annotated primary national setting in over 96% of cases and,
at the more detailed state or provincial level, with human annotations over 92% of
the time. In The Crying of Lot 49, this is particularly clear: US locations occur over
ten times more often than do those in any other single nation, and California (even
without Kinneret or San Narciso) out-tallies New York by a similar margin. The
method is thus generally robust to fictional locations (which are very often
accompanied by nearby nonfictional ones) and to individual geocoding errors (which
are much more likely to go undetected in low-frequency instances than in highfrequency ones). For these reasons, it is unlikely that the method might fail to capture
the general geographic sense of a country’s aggregate literary output, even as it is
possible to imagine cases in which it may miss or mistake details that are important
to individual readings.

The corpora
To compare internationalism in novels over time, we assembled 13 Englishlanguage corpora as summarized in table 1. Together, these collections cover British
and American fiction published between 1850 and 2009, subdivided to allow
comparisons by critical and market success and by divergent definitions of national
origin. The largest corpora are those that capture all fiction output between the
relevant dates in the HathiTrust digital library. Depending on the working definition
of national origin, these corpora (labeled “Hathi XX”) range from about 6,400 to
91,500 volumes. The “Wright” and “Chicago” corpora include similarly broad

57

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

representations of (solely) American fiction published between 1851-1875 and
1880-1990, respectively. The remaining collections are smaller, each comprising
hundreds of volumes that were bestsellers, nominated for US literary prizes,
reviewed in prestigious journals, or written by prominent British authors.
Identifier Description (Source)

Natio
n

Years

Vols

Words

Bestselle Bestselling fiction in the UK
rs GB
before 1950 (Underwood)

GB

18501949

150

21.3M

Bestselle Bestselling fiction in the US
rs US
before 1950 (Underwood)
Early

US

18501949

189

25.8M

Bestselle Bestselling fiction in the US
rs US
after 1950 (So)
Postwar

US

19501999

367

71.4M

Chicago

Twentieth-century American
fiction (Chicago Text Lab)

US

18801990

8,577

897M

Hathi
GB

Fiction published in the UK
(Hathi)

GB

18502009

31,071 3.49B

Hathi PR Fiction with Library of
Congress classification PR,
British (Hathi)

GB

18502009

6,417

Hathi PS Fiction with Library of
Congress classification PS,
American (Hathi)

US

18502009

13,141 1.54B

Hathi US Fiction published in the US
(Hathi)

US

18502009

91,501 10.5B

58

800M

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Prizes
US

Fiction shortlisted for literary
prizes in the US after 1950
(So)

US

19502000

336

46.4M

Promine Fiction by prominent British
nt British writers of the modernist era
(Evans and Wilkens)

GB

18801940

576

57.7M

Reviewe
d GB

Fiction reviewed in British
journals before 1950
(Underwood)

GB

18501949

338

34.5M

Reviewe
d US

Fiction reviewed in US
journals, before 1950
(Underwood)

US

18501949

210

24.0M

Wright

Civil War-era US fiction
(Wilkens)

US

18511875

1,045

79.8M

Table 1. Summary of the corpora.10

There are several definitions of national origin that are operative across the corpora,
though only one is applied within each corpus. The lists of bestsellers and of
reviewed books, as well as the large Hathi US and Hathi GB collections, are defined
by the geography of the book business, that is, by the nation in which a book was
published, collected, or reviewed. The Hathi PR and PS, as well as the Wright,
Chicago, and Prominent British corpora, are defined by the bibliographer-assigned
national origin of each book’s author, regardless of where the volume was
produced.11 The US prize-nominated corpus straddles this distinction, but hews
closer to the later (author-based), since many US prizes are open only to American
authors. Using these diverging criteria of national origin -- some author-based, some
reception- and market-based -- allows the present study to test, indirectly, for
differences in international attention between authors and readers.
The variations in scope, archival sourcing, market orientation, and historical
coverage across the corpora also allow for multiple perspectives on the most salient
features of national literary cultures. That said, no superposition of perspectives -59

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

and no archive -- is complete. Note, in particular, two features of primarily Hathibased (and many other library-based) archives. First, these corpora are shaped by the
decisions of the historical publishing industries in the United States and Great Britain
and by the collecting practices of the university and research-oriented libraries from
which Hathi volumes are drawn. Books that were never formally published or that
were issued by less prestigious or non-academic presses are underrepresented in the
Hathi digital library. Underrepresentation in publishing and collection
disproportionately affected (and continues to affect) writing by members of
marginalized groups, as well as books belonging to lower-status genres such as
romance and detective fiction.
Second, the collection practices of university libraries have changed over time, as
has the international scope of major publishers. In particular, the quality of
publication location as a predictor of author nationality is not constant across the
period 1850-2009, as shown in figure 1. Volumes published in Britain and digitized
by Hathi are almost always more likely to have been written by British authors than
US-published volumes are to have been written by American authors. For both
nations, the domestic-author fraction present in Hathi was highest at the beginning
of the period under examination (that is, in the mid-nineteenth century), lowest
around the middle of the twentieth century, and has moved upward again in recent
decades. This effect is strong enough that publication location becomes an
objectively poor proxy for author nationality in the Hathi corpora at some points,
though publication location may remain a useful index of readership or of the
composition of the literary marketplace.

60

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 1. Fraction of randomly sampled Hathi fiction volumes (n=941) for which author nationality matches nation
of publication as a function of publication decade, with LOWESS fits.12 Marker area indicates number of volumes
sampled.

Are American authors homers?
Three of the corpora (Wright, Chicago, and Hathi PS) comprise books by authors
judged by scholars, bibliographers, or librarians to be American. Together, these
corpora span the period 1851-2009, with modest overlap. They thus provide both a
summary picture of US literary internationalism across the nineteenth, twentieth,
and early twenty-first centuries, and an opportunity to correlate results from multiple
sources and archives. Figure 2 depicts the mean fraction of place name mentions in
each of these corpora that fall within the borders of the modern United States (that
is, US borders as they stood in 2019), grouped by year of publication.

61

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

Figure 2. Fraction of named locations that are domestic in three author-based US corpora, with linear fits. Values
averaged by year. Marker area indicates number of volumes.

The data shown in figure 2 suggest that American authors favored domestic
locations, which accounted consistently for about 60-65% of all place mentions that
can be associated with any single nation. The data also show little sign of sharp
departures from this average over time in any of the corpora, nor do they indicate
any significant incompatibilities in their levels of domestic geographic investment
despite having been compiled by different hands from varying sources over a period
of more than 60 years. (The upward slope of the linear fit for the Hathi PS corpus is
mathematically accurate but conceptually misleading, since the underlying data are
sparse before 1980.) This is an important result, one that begins to answer the
question of whether or not American authors devote much of their attention to places
within the United States. As a group, they do.

62

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Perhaps most striking in this result is the stability of domestic attention over more
than 150 years. Such stability is especially notable in light of the United States’
shifting global prominence during the same century and a half. It is difficult to
imagine any fully satisfactory measure of a nation’s worldwide importance; the
purpose of the present article is certainly not to do so. But we have seen in previous
work that the United States’ share of global GDP between 1850 and 2009 varied to
a much greater extent than did American authors’ attention to locations outside the
US, as shown in figure 3.13 It is possible to observe large changes in broad features
of American culture over spans of years or single decades. US authors’ mean
international attention appears not to be among them.

Figure 3. Comparison of domestic attention in three author-based US corpora to US global GDP share, 1850-2009.
GDP marker sizes represent the relative size of the global economy, by year.14

63

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

Is American fiction unique in its consistent devotion to domestic locations? To begin
to answer this question, we can compare the above result to the fraction of domestic
literary attention in books by British authors.15 Figure 4 adds two author-based
British corpora to those displayed in figure 2. Hathi PR is analogous to Hathi PS; it
is a large, contemporary-leaning collection of volumes of fiction by authors
classified as British. The Prominent British corpus, derived from Evans and Wilkens,
is smaller, covers the period 1880 to 1940, and is limited to novels by writers
included in a handful of literary anthologies and companions of explicitly canonical
orientation.

Figure 4. Domestic attention in American and British author-based corpora, plus attention to the US in the Hathi
PR (British) corpus and to Britain in the Hathi PS (American) corpus.

British authors (red markers) used domestic locations at lower average rates than did
their American counterparts (blue) and the British corpora show meaningful change

64

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

over time in ways that the American corpora do not. Comparatively high-status
British writing of the modernist era was more domestically inclined than was (and
is) the wider run of British fiction collected by American libraries, but both groups
devoted well over half of their explicit place mentions to locations outside the United
Kingdom. British authors registered the falling global prominence of Britain itself - and the rise of the United States -- via a noisy but steady exchange of locations in
the United Kingdom for those in the United States across the full period, especially
after the early twentieth century (compare the red and green series). American
authors, although they did not devote notably more of their attention to domestic
locations over time (their US fraction started high and stayed high over time), did
devote less of their geographic usage to British places (yellow markers) after 1900,
falling to well below 10% of overall location occurrences by mid-century.
The data from author-based national corpora suggest that both British and American
writers have consistently devoted a large fraction of their literary-geographic
attention to locations within their home country. This effect is much stronger and
more durable among American authors; where British authors have used fewer
British locations over time, American authors have shown no such trend with respect
to American locations (although they, too, have come to use markedly fewer British
locations today than they did in 1850). While there is no normatively correct level
of domestic literary-geographic attention, the British case shows that changes to that
level are possible and, hence, that the geographic inertia characteristic of American
fiction is not an inevitable feature of all national literatures.

Are readers different?
If it appears that American authors are homers -- or, at least, that an unspecified
confluence of factors produced a mostly uniform, relatively high level of domestic
attention in American fiction over more than 150 years -- is the same true of
American readers? This is a difficult question to answer in the absence of detailed,
large-scale information about historical patterns of readership and reception.16 But
we do have ready access to two distinct proxies for the books that were available to
readers and that some readers chose to read: library collection records and historical
bestseller lists.

65

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

Libraries, as a group, collect the books that librarians believe their patrons will find
useful.17 While the definitions of “patrons” and “useful” at play in over 150 years of
acquisitions practices in a large group of mostly research-oriented libraries vary
widely and can represent only imperfectly the full range of literary output and
consumption, the books that libraries hold -- and, hence, the books included in the
HathiTrust digital library -- constitute one broad-based version of the literary works
to which readers have had access between 1850 and today.
Figure 5 adds two new, very large, library-based corpora to the author-based datasets
examined above. These are labeled Hathi GB and Hathi US, the two letters indicating
the country in which a volume of fiction held by Hathi was published, regardless of
the nationality of its author or authors.

Figure 5. Domestic attention in author-based and library-based corpora.

66

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

With the reiterated caveat that the composition of these corpora is necessarily filtered
through the acquisition practices of US-based libraries rather than reflecting directly
the publishing output of each nation, note how different are the rates of domestic
attention when considered from the perspective of what was available to readers
rather than what was produced by national authors. The British case is the more
straightforward of the two: British literature identified by publication location
contains lower UK domestic usage on average than that among books by strictly
British writers, but shows a similar decline over time.
The American case is more complex and, perhaps, more interesting. The publicationbased corpus is much less domestically oriented in general, but it -- unlike the authorbased US corpora -- trends toward greater domestic US attention over the course of
the twentieth century. If US authors have favored American locations more or less
consistently, US publishing and library collections have shown much greater
geographic variation, in part due to the shifting national composition of the authors
they publish and collect (see figure 1). That said, there is little evidence in this data
of any recent shift toward broad-based internationalism in American fiction. If
anything, fiction published in the US over the last generation or so is more
domestically oriented than at any point since at least the mid-nineteenth century. To
the extent that an observation like Engdahl’s (that contemporary US fiction is “too
isolated, too insular”) is meant to encompass developments across the whole of
American publishing (an interpretation that is by no means certain), it finds its best
support here.
But perhaps scholars, critics, and ordinary readers mean something different when
they talk about “American fiction.” Perhaps they care less about the whole of literary
production -- which has long been much too voluminous for any single reader to
grasp -- and more about the handful of books that they (and people like them) read.
While large library collections help to characterize the shape of the literary
marketplace, they offer a relatively weak proxy for readership, which is generally
dominated by a small number of bestselling or “important” titles.18 To assess
whether or not mainstream readers have encountered greater or lesser domestic
attention in their texts, we can examine the data in American and British bestsellers,
as shown in figure 6.

67

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

Figure 6. Domestic attention in bestsellers and in publication-location–based corpora.

The bestseller data are a bit tricky -- both to see in figure 6 and to assess -- since they
are so few: in the Bestsellers US Early corpus, which covers the 100-year period
from 1850 to 1949, there are just 188 volumes (fewer than two per year); there are
367 in the Bestsellers US Postwar corpus (1950-1999) and 150 in the Bestsellers GB
corpus (1852-1944). Because these corpora are small, the results are noisy. The
noise, in turn, complicates the apparent discontinuity between the US corpora at
1950. This break is more a matter of visual perception than mathematical certainty;
the weighted least-squares fits drawn through the data have high uncertainties in
both their true levels and their trends. But it is safe to say that bestsellers in both the
US and British cases do not diverge sharply in their distribution of domestic attention
from the behavior of the larger, author- and library-based corpora. The bestsellers,
in fact, most closely resemble the author-based corpora (Hathi PR and Hathi PS, not

68

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

included in figure 6): flat to slightly rising domestic attention in the US, steadily
declining domestic share in the UK.
As an aside, note that the congruence of the variously defined British corpora
(bestsellers, prominent writers of the modernist era, librarian-identified British
authors, and UK imprints; see figure 7) supports the hypothesis that the observed
differences in levels of domestic attention between the US and UK are not driven
primarily by Hathi library collection practices. To put it more plainly: if we were
worried that American libraries collect British books that don’t properly represent
British fiction (because American librarians don’t have access to parts of the British
book market, or because American readers prefer an idiosyncratic kind of British
writing, or for some other reason), the fact that the results in the bestseller and
prominent corpora are very similar to the Hathi-based corpora should help to set our
minds at ease, at least on this specific score.

Figure 7. Domestic attention in four British corpora, showing broad convergence in level and trend.

69

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

Is serious literature different?
It appears that British and American authors, readers, and publishers did and do
differ in their books’ attention to domestic locations. Their differences have been
maintained across scales and periods and are larger -- in some cases, much larger -today than they were in the past. These results support Engdahl’s claim concerning
the relatively parochial nature of American fiction. They also support in an indirect
sense Dimock’s argument that US literary criticism nevertheless tends to
overemphasize domestic concerns, because the level of international attention in US
fiction, while lower than in the British case, is still substantial. And they undercut
arguments from critics and readers alike that recent decades have seen a rise or
revival of the globally engaged American novel as a dominant form.
There remains, however, at least one case that is notably important to scholars,
critics, and literary intellectuals, but that isn’t well captured in the data presented to
this point. I mean, of course, “serious” (or “important” or “literary” or -- an oldfashioned word -- “high-brow”) literature. When Engdahl said that American
authors “don’t really participate in the big dialogue of literature,” he almost certainly
didn’t mean that American authors aren’t widely read outside the States or that J.K.
Rowling didn’t find an American audience. He meant instead that American fiction
(or American literary culture) is, at the high end of prestige, a system unto itself, one
characterized by books and readers that mostly engage with one another and that, as
a system, maintains comparatively high barriers to entry for non-American
participants.
To evaluate how domestic and international attention behave in high-prestige fiction,
we require working definitions of prestige that can be applied across many decades
and on both sides of the Atlantic.19 Two candidate definitions that have been widely
used are nominations for (select) literary prizes and reviews in high-status literary
journals. The latter is, in principle, more expansive than the former (because more
books are reviewed than are nominated for prizes), but both criteria revolve around
the allocation of a scarce resource (prize money, page space) within a small fraction
of the literary field that has high impact among status-conscious participants.

70

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 8 shows the changes in domestic attention over time in British and American
novels selected for review or nominated for high-status prizes. Though the corpora
are of modest size and the data are noisy, the trends in the figure are suggestive. The
fiction reviewed in high-status British journals before 1950 behaves similarly to
British fiction as a whole (compare figure 7); it is closest in level and trend to the
large, author-based Hathi PR corpus. Likewise, fiction reviewed in high-status US
journals over the same period allocates its geographic attention in ways that broadly
resemble US fiction overall, and that are perhaps closest to the behavior of US
bestsellers.

Figure 8. Domestic literary attention in American and British high-status volumes.

It is the set of postwar books nominated for US prizes that suggests, finally, why
Engdahl’s claim about the chauvinism of contemporary American fiction struck so
many knowledgeable observers of US literary culture as implausible. In this case
alone among the US corpora do we find a sustained rise in international attention.20
71

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

If the books to which one pays special attention belong to a system of prestige
organized by domestic literary prizes, and if one emphasizes changes in the observed
level of internationalism over the absolute level itself, then it will appear that US
fiction became significantly less US-centric in the decades leading up to the new
millennium.21 This trend is in keeping with the international turn of high-profile
prizes outside the United States, most notably the Booker, which has been the subject
of extensive commentary both academic and popular.22
But prize-nominated literature in the US, although it became more international over
time in the postwar period, was never notably international in comparison to other
writing. This is true even within the United States, where the mean domestic fraction
in books published between 1980 and 2000 was lower than the prize-nominated set
in every corpus but the (restrictively American) Hathi PS set. The British corpora,
meanwhile, never rose above 30% domestic on average over the same two decades.
There is, in short, little evidence of any fundamental reversal of relatively high
domestic regard in books written, read, reviewed, and celebrated in the United States
over the last century and a half. Engdahl was almost certainly wrong to assert that
no (or very few) American authors today engage international themes or concerns in
important ways, and Dimock was certainly correct to push American literary
criticism circa 2000 toward greater awareness of global connection: after all, roughly
a third of location mentions in American fiction, under multiple definitions of
“American,” lie outside the United States. But American books do favor American
locations and have done so at levels that have proven remarkably resistant to
historical change.

Specific attention does change
Although American literature has consistently favored domestic locations, there
have nevertheless been meaningful shifts over time in the detailed distribution of its
international attention. The same is true of British literature. The simplest way to see
these differences is to plot the fraction of location mentions that fall within each of
several large countries by year, as shown in figure 9.

72

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 9. Literary attention to nine countries, by year, in two large, market-based corpora. (Top) Hathi US corpus,
(bottom) Hathi GB corpus.

73

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

The lower-rightmost subplot for each corpus reproduces the fraction of attention
devoted to the United States in the relevant data set, as previously discussed. What
figure 9 adds is information about attention to selected nations outside the US and
UK, which were previously agglomerated as “foreign” or “non-domestic.”
Three features stand out in figure 9. First, there was a notable decline over time in
attention to several western European nations, including Italy, France, and Great
Britain, that occupied significant narrative space early in the period. Second, there
appears to have been a modest rise in attention to Japan and China in the second half
of the twentieth century. Third, there was a detectable, if noisy and uneven, increase
in attention to the major powers of the Second World War during the years
surrounding that conflict, including the interwar period. This potentially conflictrelated redistribution is somewhat more easily seen in the British corpus than in the
American one.
It is unclear whether the geographic changes indicated in figure 9 accord with any
standard view of twentieth-century literary geography. Previous work has found that
the geography of war was linked to changes in literary attention, especially in the
cases of the US Civil War and the Second World War, and there is certainly a rich
critical tradition studying the literary effects of conflict, violence, and trauma.23 But
the limited scope of traditional critical methods means that it has been difficult to
generalize from the geography of individual texts to the collective features of
national literatures. The same is true of the apparent partial shift from western
European locations to Japan and China: the change is a plausible one under many
theories of twentieth-century literary development, but it has not been previously
documented at scale.

Geographic redistribution in detail
As important as are these selective nation-level developments of twentieth-century
literary geography, they remain largely impressionistic and they do little to discern
the specific geographic texture of the processes that gave rise to them. Decreased
attention to Italy, for example, could have been driven by a shift away from general
references to the country or by one or more specific sites within its borders that came
to occupy less narrative space over time. Beyond the question of specificity versus

74

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

generality, we also face the problem of weighing large proportional changes in
relatively small values (a doubling of attention to locations in India, say) to smaller
proportional (but larger absolute) changes in large quantities.
To address these issues, we examine two statistical measures of the changes in
attention to countries and to individual named locations in the periods before and
after the Second World War (1900-1945 and 1946-2009, respectively) and before
and after the fall of the Berlin Wall (1945-89 and 1990-2009). The first, Cohen’s d,
is a measure of effect size. It calculates the number of standard deviations by which
the means of the two groups, earlier and later, are separated with respect to the
number of times a given location or country occurs (per 100,000 words) in each. The
second, Welch’s t, is a hypothesis test. It measures the likelihood that the observed
difference between the group means might arise by chance from populations that
share the same true mean. Together, these two tests help to assess the importance
(critically speaking) and the significance (statistically speaking) of the differences
in geographic usage within each corpus across the twentieth century.
Countries first. Recall that the count for each nation collects not only mentions of
the nation itself, in whatever form (“United States,” “America,” “USA,” and so on),
but also all references to places within that nation. Among books published in the
United States, the biggest mover by effect size -- by far -- was Great Britain, which
dropped to 9% of total mentions in the postwar period from almost 16% in prewar
volumes. France and Belgium also fell by large amounts, as did Monaco.24 Austria
and Germany dropped, too, by slightly smaller amounts. This result is in keeping
with the claim that European locations played generally smaller roles in postwar
American fiction than they had during the first half of the twentieth century, perhaps
reflecting a larger turn away from Europe as the center of both high-cultural
influence and US-bound emigration. Gaining importance after 1945, beyond the
United States itself, were countries including Vietnam, Japan, China, Poland,
Mexico, and Iran. Note that these countries didn’t necessarily become important,
full stop, after 1945: only about 1% of postwar place mentions were in Mexico or in
Japan, and less than 0.3% were in Iran. But those levels represented large increases
relative to the amount of prewar attention devoted to each of those nations.

75

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

Drawing on the observed changes in US-published literature before and after 1945,
we make two notes. First, war or conflict appears to have been a major driver of
literary-geographic attention. Many of the highest-ranking upward movers were
nations with which the United States experienced major or sustained tension after
1945.25 Among downward movers, friendly and allied European nations generally
experienced larger drops than did former Axis powers or Russia.26 Second, the count
of countries that gained attention after 1945 is greater than the count of those that
lost attention. In other words, American international literary-geographic attention
became somewhat more widely dispersed in the postwar period than it had been
before the war.
The second half of the twentieth century, splitting at 1989, shows similar trends. The
United States rose in prominence. Western Europe became less important to
American authors (the UK, Italy, France, Germany, and Spain all dropped). Russia
dropped after 1989, too, while China and Latin American countries including
Mexico, El Salvador, and Costa Rica all rose. Vietnam rose, as did Afghanistan and
Iraq (the last below the level of statistical significance, although the effect size, about
0.7, was large). Again, American literature seems to have redistributed its
geographic attention after 1989 in ways that broadly reflected changes in the foreign
political investments of the nation. Economic shifts of the early twenty-first century,
especially the rise of BRICS nations other than China, do not appear to correlate
strongly with literary attention, in keeping with previous findings.27
Aspects of this American story were present in British literature as well, although
the details sometimes diverged sharply, especially around the two nations’ different
colonial histories. Among books published in the UK between 1900 and 2009,
decreasing attention was allocated to Great Britain, Belgium, France, and Spain after
1945. Gaining attention in the postwar decades were the United States, decolonizing
nations including Nigeria and Jamaica, and newly created Israel.28 Between 1945
and 2009, again splitting at 1989, the trends are a bit harder to read and statistical
significance is rare, even as effect sizes remain moderate to large. France, Belgium,
Russia, Italy, and Switzerland all fell in frequency (the latter two below the level of
statistical significance), while former colonial possessions of the UK were largely
absent from the list of top movers one way or the other, with the exceptions of

76

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Pakistan and Jamaica (which rose substantially within a context of relatively sparse
usage, to around 0.25% of all mentions; d ≅ 0.5, but not significant).
Unlike American fiction, British literature did not move sharply toward a wider
range of geographic reference in the second half of the twentieth century. There were
about the same number of nations that gained attention in UK-published texts after
1989 as there were that lost it. Examining the full century, there were only slightly
more gainers than losers after 1945 in the British case.
With the exception of large proportional fluctuations is rarely mentioned locations,
the declining salience of Belgian locations is perhaps the biggest surprise among
British texts (Belgian places also dropped significantly in American literature after
1945, but their decline slowed later in the postwar period). One suspects this
phenomenon has to do with Belgium’s dual role in the British literary imagination:
at once the site of Great War battles, which became much less prominently featured
after 1945 (mentions of “Flanders” dropped precipitously, for example), and the seat
of European bureaucracy later in the century. The former, it seems, was a more
appealing literary subject than the latter, but additional investigation is required to
fully explain the case.
Returning to American books and examining the much smaller corpora of bestsellers
and high-status literature, we observe a handful of differences. War and political
rivalry remained major predictors of changes in literary attention, with Japan,
Russia, and Iraq all among the top risers in books that sold very well after 1945.
Bestsellers also displayed a preponderance of risers overall, indicating a
diversification of postwar literary-geographic reference. Unlike the broader US
fiction case, however, bestsellers focused somewhat less attention on American
locations in the second half of the twentieth century, and showed very little change
in their overall use of British locations. Prestigious volumes -- those that were
reviewed in high-status journals or nominated for major prizes -- turned more
frequently to Japan and Mexico, as well as to Poland and Russia, while devoting less
attention to the UK and other western European locations. We stop short of firm
conclusions regarding these corpora, however, since their relatively small sizes
produce noisy data, which in turn leads to smaller effect sizes and lower statistical
significance.
77

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

Finally, we note briefly the results of similar analyses performed not on countries in
aggregate but on unique place names. On the whole, the patterns of change over time
were similar: less Europe and more America, somewhat wider geographic
dispersion, a move away from the sites of older conflicts and toward the sites of
newer ones. Within the United States, literary attention appears to have followed
population growth in the south and the west. In British literature, the regional terms
“Africa,” “Caribbean,” and “Eastern Europe” were all major postwar gainers.
American bestsellers and prize-nominated books followed patterns similar to their
nation-aggregated results and to the directions of US fiction overall. In particular,
“Africa” and “Mexico” (as well as “Atlantic” and Pacific”) were among the top
rising geographic terms in high-status American novels after 1945, in keeping with
the argument that the postwar literature of distinction contained more markers of
global engagement than did less critically lauded writing.
Taken together, these results suggest two nations at different stages of their imperial
development. British fiction in the nineteenth century already engaged the
geographic diversity of a global colonial power. By the early twentieth century,
British literature had begun to devote less of its attention to the UK or to the core of
western Europe, while giving more page space to the United States. After World
War II, those trends continued, now shuffling an already diverse set of international
investments and gradually continuing a long-established drift away from domestic
attention. In the US, by contrast, we find a literary system the international
orientation of which was modest and primarily European in the years before World
War II, but that diversified its internationalism markedly during the second half of
the twentieth century. What hasn’t happened yet in the American case is a decisive
turn away from the geographic dominance of the United States itself.
Will American fiction follow the British example in the decades ahead as American
power and influence decline from their post-Cold War peaks? It might; if it does, we
should expect to see, for the first time in American literary history, a drop in the
overall level of investment in US locations and, eventually, an approach toward a
steady state of diversity among international locations. There exists modest evidence
of increasing diversification in the present data, but little as yet to suggest that the
mechanisms by which the US might be even slightly decentered in its own literature

78

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

(more internationalism in high-status books, a possible post-2000 dip in domestic
share) have taken hold in the system of American literary production as a whole.

Conclusions
The results and analysis reported here constitute the first large-scale, comparative
historical study of the literary geography of the United States and Great Britain.
Collectively, they show that American literature from the mid-nineteenth through
the early twenty-first centuries was consistently and significantly more domestically
oriented than was British fiction of the same period. The stability of geographic selfregard among American-identified authors has also been striking: the fraction of
domestic literary locations used by American writers started high, stayed high
through two world wars, and remains high today. This is in marked contrast to
British fiction, which was at almost every historical point more outwardly focused
and became only more so over time. There is, in short, some justice in Horace
Engdahl’s accusation that American literature has been “too isolated, too insular” in
comparison to at least one other national literary tradition.
But the story is more complicated than that, of course. For one thing, a large fraction
of American literary-geographic attention has indeed been devoted to locations
outside the United States: a third or more and, in some instances, as much as 4050%. There is no intrinsically correct level of international attention, but there are
literally millions of references to international locations across American literature.
One might note, too, that the level of domestic analysis appropriate to large,
multicultural societies -- whatever value one considers appropriate -- is likely higher
than the level appropriate to smaller or more homogeneous societies. The United
States isn’t Sweden; what’s right for one probably isn’t right for the other.
Even if we were to believe, contrary to contemporary critical practice and to a
portion of the evidence presented here, that most US novels remain fundamentally
American in their orientation and concerns, it is surely important that they explore
those concerns through references that are very often international. It is also true
that, in recent decades, the American fiction that garnered the most prestige and
critical attention became more internationally oriented than it was in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. While the same was not true of other

79

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

corners of the US literary marketplace, the American books that were most nearly
part of Engdahl’s contemporary “big dialogue of literature” were exactly the ones
that were moving explicitly toward a more global outlook.
When we consider the specific distributions of international attention, rather than the
simple domestic/foreign split, we find that the geography of US literature became
more diverse during the twentieth century. That is, while the total amount of
geographic attention directed beyond the borders of the US stayed relatively constant
(or, in some cases, decreased) between 1900 and 2009, that constant quantity of
attention was dispersed more intensively across more nations after 1945 than it had
been during the first half of the century. As seen in previous work, war and political
rivalry appear to have been major drivers of literary attention. Traditional sites of
cultural prestige (Great Britain, France, London, Paris, Rome, etc.) did not disappear
-- on the contrary, they remained frequently invoked even into the twenty-first
century -- but they received a smaller portion of attention than they had in earlier
decades.
The present study is also among the first explicitly to compare large national-literary
corpora constructed according to divergent definitions of national belonging. These
definitions include those based on author identity, on the sites of publication output,
on the tastes of readers, and on the practices of critics. The goal has not been to
identify a supposed best or truest version of American or British literature. There is
obviously no such thing. But comparison across plausible versions of nationality has
allowed the study to begin to identify features that do (and do not) differ depending
on what one might emphasize as the bases of national literary affinity.
Despite the scope of the datasets examined, there remain important limitations and
opportunities for future work. It has not yet been possible to explore the results of
these methods in other national or regional literatures beyond those of the United
States and Great Britain, but there is no fundamental barrier to doing so; the findings
would be of obvious value. A comparison of US literary output to that of Europe (as
a whole) and to China would be especially useful, since they represent instances of
population size, social complexity, and economic weight that would provide
important counterpoints to the British case.

80

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Nor do the current corpora fully capture the literary output of the nations they do
include. In addition to the systematic exclusions from library corpora discussed
above, we have made no effort in the present research to capture literature published
in newspapers, periodicals, or other media, which were historically important outlets
for both mainstream and marginalized writers. The same is true today with respect
to online publications, which have radically lowered the barriers to publication and
readership, but which are not included in our data. Facets of authorial identity
beyond national affiliation are obvious areas of interest, as are the comparative
historical dynamics of nonfiction writing in both long form (histories, biographies,
essays, etc.) and shorter, faster-moving formats such as newspaper articles,
pamphlets, and social media posts. All of these are areas to be explored.
These limitations notwithstanding, the study has argued that American literature
showed a preference for domestic locations compared to the British example over
the last century and a half. This preference was largely and surprisingly stable over
time, but its overall stability ought not to mask important shifts in its international
attention that aligned with the coarse features of American foreign political
engagement. While British literature was consistently more international in its
geographic usage, it, too, responded in easily measurable ways to the politics of war,
rivalry, and decolonization in the twentieth century.
With these results in hand, we possess not only a widely informed response to the
critical and cultural reorientation of American literary studies in the twenty-first
century, but also a new background against which to compare the literary geography
of other national traditions, of other subsets of American and British writing, and of
new directions in US literary output in the years ahead.

References
Engdahl’s remarks were widely reported at the time. See, for instance, the original AP story, the Guardian’s
follow-up, and the New York Times’ coverage.
1

2

The MLA bibliography contains not a single reference to Engdahl in connection with the Nobel, apart from an
article of Engdahl’s own.
3

Wai Chee Dimock, Through Other Continents: American Literature across Deep Time (Princeton: Princeton UP,
2006), 2-3.

81

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

4

Caroline F. Levander and Robert S. Levine, eds, Hemispheric American Studies (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers UP,
2007); Rachel Adams, Continental Divides: Remapping the Cultures of North America, (Chicago: U of Chicago P,
2009).
5

Paul Giles, The Global Remapping of American Literature (Princeton: Princeton UP, 2011); Caren Irr, Toward the
Geopolitical Novel: U.S. Fiction in the Twenty-First Century (New York: Columbia UP, 2013); Paul Jay, Global
Matters: The Transnational Turn in Literary Studies (Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP, 2010); Bruce Robbins, “The
Worlding of the American Novel.” The Cambridge History of the American Novel (Cambridge, Cambridge UP,
2011), 1096–1106.
6

Examples of quantitative geographic analysis of literary texts include David Cooper, Christopher Donaldson, and
Patricia Murrieta-Flores, eds., Literary Mapping in the Digital Age, (Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2016); David Cooper
and Ian N. Gregory, “Mapping the English Lake District: A Literary GIS,” Transactions of the Institute of British
Geographers 36, no. 1 (2011): 89–108; Elizabeth F. Evans and Matthew Wilkens, “Nation, Ethnicity, and the
Geography of British Fiction, 1880-1940,” Journal of Cultural Analytics, 2018; Ryan Heuser, Franco Moretti, and
Erik Steiner, “The Emotions of London,” Pamphlets of the Stanford Literary Lab (Stanford, CA: Stanford
University, 2016); Matthew Wilkens, “The Geographic Imagination of Civil War-Era American Fiction,” American
Literary History 25, no. 4 (2013): 803–40.
7

For details of the present method, see Evans and Wilkens, op. cit., and the code supplement to this article. Note
that, in the present work, the threshold for predicted fiction probability has been raised to 0.8; in previous work, we
used a lower threshold (0.5). In effect, we now exclude some volumes that we are less confident contain primarily
narrative fiction. See the linked article for a discussion of the systematic differences in geographic usage across
fiction and narrative nonfiction texts.
8

As in previous work, we use contemporary (circa 2019) national boundaries in all cases. For the US corpora, this
means that a tiny fraction of domestic references are to locations or territories that were not under US control at the
time of a source work’s publication. One might also consider a slightly larger fraction (about 1%) of such references
to pre-statehood territories as only ambiguously domestic. In either case, an alternate treatment would have no
material impact on the present results.
In addition to the sources cited in note 6, see also the thoughtful treatment by Cameron Blevins in “Space, Nation,
and the Triumph of Region: A View of the World from Houston,” Journal of American History 101, no. 1 (2014):
122–47.
9

10

For additional information, see the code supplement to this article, as well as chapter 3 of Ted Underwood,
Distant Horizons: Digital Evidence and Literary Change (Chicago, 2019); Elizabeth Evans and Matthew Wilkens,
op.cit.; and Matthew Wilkens, op. cit. For genre determination in the Hathi datasets, see Ted Underwood, Boris
Capitanu, Peter Organisciak, Sayan Bhattacharyya, Loretta Auvil, Colleen Fallaw, J. Stephen Downie (2015),
“Word Frequencies in English-Language Literature, 1700-1922 (0.2)” and associated work in progress. An overview
of the Hathi fiction corpora is provided in Ted Underwood, Patrick Kimitus, and Jessica Witte, “NovelTM Datasets
for English-Language Fiction, 1700-2009,” Journal of Cultural Analytics, 2020. Lists of bestselling and prizenominated novels by American authors were supplied by Richard Jean So and Teddy Roland from publicly released
records. Hathi PS contains a small number (<1%) of volumes by Canadian authors.
11

Assignments of author national origin follow the guidelines of the Library of Congress, which rely on accepted
scholarly use. In practice, there are relatively few difficult cases over most of the period in question, though this fact
does not diminish the potential complications in any individual instance.
12

Excludes volumes by authors of unknown or ambiguous national origin.

Matthew Wilkens, “The Perpetual Fifties of American Fiction,” in Neoliberalism and Contemporary Literary
Culture, ed. Mitchum Huehls and Rachel Greenwald-Smith (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 2016), 181–202.
13

14

GDP values are harmonized and calculated in inflation-adjusted dollars. US GDP share calculated relative to nine
other major economies. For details of the GDP measurement method, see Wilkens, “Perpetual Fifties,” op. cit. Data

82

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

are derived from the Maddison Project Database, version 2013. Bolt, J. and J. L. van Zanden (2014); see also “The
Maddison Project: collaborative research on historical national accounts,” The Economic History Review, 67, no. 3
(2014): 627–651.
15

Domestic British locations are those that fall within the present-day borders of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland. The so-called Home Nations (England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland) are
first-level administrative units within the UK. Thus “Britain,” “UK,” “England,” and “Wales,” for example, are all
counted as British domestic locations for our purposes. All former British colonial possessions are counted as nonBritish, even if they were under British rule at the time a book was published. In general, British literary references
to “Britain” and to locations in England significantly outnumber those to other British and (conceptually or
historically) British-linked places. For more on the status of former British colonial territories in particular, see
Evans and Wilkens, op.cit., and references therein.
16

Reception-oriented book-historical scholarship of the type practiced by Janice Radway, Priya Joshi, and others has
proven valuable at micro- and meso-scales and might be extended profitably toward market-wide scope in the
future. More strictly business-oriented studies of the publishing industry, such as Albert Greco, Clara Rodríguez,
and Robert M. Wharton, The Culture and Commerce of Publishing in the 21st Century (Stanford, CA: Stanford UP,
2006), are useful, but tend not to emphasize problems of readership.
The motto of the American Library Association, adopted in 1892, is “the best reading, for the largest number, at
the least cost.” On the historical practices of librarians and on their self-identified role as “apostles of culture,” see
Dee Garrison, Apostles of Culture: The Public Librarian and American Society, 1876-1920 (New York, Free P,
1979) and Lynne Tatlock, Matt Erlin, Douglas Knox, and Stephen Pentecost, “Crossing Over: Gendered Reading
Formations in the Muncie Public Library, 1891-1902,” Journal of Cultural Analytics, 2018.
17

18

On the role of bestsellers and blockbusters in American publishing, see Joel Waldfogel, Digital Renaissance:
What Data and Economics Tell Us about the Future of Popular Culture (Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP, 2018); Alan
Sorensen, “Bestseller Lists and Product Variety,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 55, no. 4 (2007): 715-738; and
Greco, Rodríguez, and Wharton, op. cit.
19

The academic literature on literary prestige is too voluminous to cite in detail. For that reason, I note only that I
am grateful to James English for insightful comments pointing in this direction and for his important work in The
Economy of Prestige (Harvard, 2005). For attempts to work with large-scale quantitative data concerning literary
prestige, see especially Mark Algee-Hewitt et al., “Canon/Archive: Large-Scale Dynamics in the Literary Field”
(2016); J. D. Porter, “Popularity/Prestige” (2018); and chapter 3 of Underwood, Distant Horizons, op. cit.
20

The rise in international attention is here visible as a decline in its inverse, domestic attention.

21

To quantify the trend, the fraction of domestic locations in prize-nominated fiction in the US decreased by about
0.3 percent per year between 1945 and 2009 (p=0.02), or more than 10 percentage points overall.
22

On the relationship between the Booker and the geographic expansion of British fiction after 1980, see especially
Kara Donnelly, “The Booker Prize: Literature, Britain, and the World, 1968-1999,” PhD dissertation, (University of
Notre Dame, 2015) and Graham Huggan, “Prizing ‘Otherness’: A Short History of the Booker,” Studies in the Novel
29.3 (1997), pp. 412-33.
23

On conflict and literary geography at scale, see Wilkens, “Geographic”; and Wilkens, “Perpetual,” both op.cit.

24

Unless otherwise noted, all results are significant at the (adjusted) p < 0.05 level after applying the BejaminiHochberg procedure to account for multiple comparisons. See code supplement for details of the adjustment and for
tables of results.
25

We might note further that the list of countries with which the United States has experienced some form of tension
or rivalry over the last 75 years is long, indeed.

83

“TOO ISOLATED, TOO INSULAR”: AMERICAN LITERATURE AND THE WORLD

26

A note on Russia: The present study uses 2019 boundaries for Russia. Locations in former Soviet republics are
assigned to their present-day nations. We resolve instances of “Soviet Union” to Russia and translate Soviet-era
place names, so far as possible, into their contemporary Russian equivalents.
27

Wilkens, “Perpetual,” op.cit.

28

Israel also gains in the US case, though it falls further down the list of risers, likely due to the more pervasive use
of biblical locations in religiously themed American fiction during the first half of the century.

84

