Journal of
Cultural Analytics

July 9, 2021

Chance Encounters: World Literature
Between the Unexpected and the
Probable
Hoyt Long
Hoyt Long, University of Chicago
Peer-Reviewer: Heekyoung Cho, Erik Hayot
Data Repository: 10.7910/DVN/1URBJR

ABSTRACT
This essay brings probabilistic reasoning into concerted dialogue with book-historical and
sociological approaches to world literature. Using extensive bibliographic data about literary
translations into Japanese during the modern era, it develops a series of case studies at
interrelated scales—the literary anthology, world library collections, and individual readers—to
reason about the likelihood of certain authors or works being plucked from the swirling currents
of the global traffic in books. At each scale, I consider how such data might inform the
interpretations we give to the choice of one author over another in a given context. Woven into
these case studies is an extended reflection on the history of probabilistic reasoning from the
late-eighteenth century to the late-twentieth. What, this essay ultimately asks, might literary
historians gain from taking this history seriously in our own appeals to chance as a form of
historical explanation?

The history of modern Japanese literature is also the history of its evolving relation
to print culture.1 From the late-nineteenth century onward, this relationship came to
be mediated by a range of new material interfaces for putting texts in front of reader’s
eyes, including library reading rooms, mass-market and coterie magazines,
newspapers, and low-cost, subscription-based book series.2 Among these, the
bookstore remained a critical point of first contact, inducing both dreams of
universal access to human knowledge and crushing existential angst. The writer
Akutagawa Ryūnosuke (1892-1927) famously captured this dynamic in 1927 in a
vignette about Tokyo’s Maruzen bookstore, long Japan’s central hub for imported
foreign books. The vignette narrates a scene from his youth in which he takes stock
of Maruzen’s shelves, inhaling their rarefied air.
It was the second floor of a certain bookstore. Twenty years old, he
climbed a Western-style ladder leaning against the shelves, searching
Journal of Cultural Analytics 7 (2021): 1-56. doi: 10.22148/001c.25525

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

for new books. Maupassant, Baudelaire, Strindberg, Ibsen, Shaw,
Tolstoy…
Soon, dusk fell, yet he continued to read the spines of the books
intently. They seemed less a row of books than the fin-de-siecle itself.
Nietzsche, Verlaine, the brothers Goncourt, Dostoevsky, Hauptmann,
Flaubert…
Fighting the gathering darkness, he listed out their names. But on
their own, the books began to sink into the melancholy shadows. He
gave up at last and began to climb down the Western-style ladder. Just
then, a bare light bulb suddenly clicked on above his head. He stayed
on the ladder and looked down at the clerks and customers through the
row of books. They seemed strangely small. And so wretched.
‘Life cannot compare to a single line of Baudelaire.’
He stayed like this for a time, watching them from atop the
ladder…”3
For all the attention this passage has received, commentators have mostly looked
past its lists of foreign authors to its allegorical connotations.4 It is assumed that the
names merely stand in for an ideation of literary modernity and should not be taken
as a literal description of what was on Maruzen’s shelves. For all we know,
Akutagawa was drawing these names randomly from memory. If they have any
connection to reality, it is more likely to be with the contents of his personal library
than with the purchase orders of Maruzen staff and clientele. But how do we come
to this conclusion? With what level of confidence do we say the lists are a random
mental projection, or an index of one material reality over another?
To question the probable verisimilitude of these names is to consider the material
specificity of literary circulation, but also how this materialization relates to
historical ideas of world literature. B. Venkat Mani, expanding on the sociological
and book-historical approaches of David Damrosch, Gisèle Sapiro, Priya Joshi, and
many others, asserts that engaging with this specificity can “shed new light on the
conceptual and ideological creation and proliferation of world literature.”5 It forces
literary historians to recognize that the circulation and reception of literature does
not happen in a “historical, socio-cultural, or political vacuum,” but is rather shaped
by patterns of “bibliomigrancy” that impinge on the imagination of world literature
2

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

in specific times and places. These patterns are mediated not just by authors,
translators, literary critics, and anthologies, but also “librarians, editors, publishers,
literary magazines, book fairs, special interest groups, government censors and
promoters, and more recently technological innovations such as electronic reading
devices and digital libraries.”6 For Mani, bibliomigrancy brings these multiple
determinants under a single term to contend with their complex dynamics and
structuring force. It is a call to read more context into any particular imagining of
world literature – to read Akutagawa’s vision not as the world of literature circa 1910
or 1927, but a world.
But which world? And to whom does it belong? Material and social context are a
means to specify the multiple possible worlds of world literature, at least to the extent
they are recoverable from the archival record. Yet they do not solve the problem of
how to think the historical indexicality of these worlds and their relation to each
other. Indeed, Mani himself celebrates a vision of world literature that takes the
particularizing force of context to one of its logical terminuses. To wit, he puts great
stock in the democratic and liberating potential of Herman Hesse’s ideal of world
literature as private library and personalized collection. His 1927 essay “A Library
of World Literature” dramatically individualizes this ideal such that it is less the
overdetermined outcome of impersonal agents and abstract market forces, or of
prescriptions by cultural elites, but the contingent result of individual choice and
experience: an ideal generated by following “the way of love, not of duty.” 7 “There
is no single library, Hesse tells us; rather, there are a thousand ways of collecting
books.”8 When every instantiation of world literature, every personal library, is as
real as any other, the significance of context is diluted. Contingency, by which is
meant all the various conditions that impinge on the movement and reception of
texts, flips inside out to become total freedom or indeterminacy at the level of the
individual. Every response to these conditions seems equally likely because each is
no more predictable than any other.
Mani’s competing visions of world literature echo an epistemological tension in
recent critiques of the “historical/contextualist” paradigm, the canon wars of the
1980s, and even older debates about the role of chance in the determination and
preservation of aesthetic value. For Joseph North, the historical/contextualist
paradigm is guided by the assumption that “works of literature are chiefly of interest
3

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

as diagnostic instruments for determining the state of the cultures in which they are
written or read.”9 The inverse also holds: the state of the culture and time in which
a work is written or read—its context—has the strongest possible bearing on its
meaning. Rita Felski has described this paradigm as a process of containment
whereby “understanding a text means clarifying the details of its placement in the
box [of history], highlighting the correlations and causalities between text-as-object
and context-as-container.”10 What this mode of interpretation misses are the
“differing and often unpredictable ways” that texts, ideas, and people “disconnect
and reconnect” and which are not reducible to the effects of historical and social
structures.11 It misses, in other words, the variability introduced by the reader, whose
“response [to a text] is never entirely predictable or knowable,” and who thus
contributes to the “hefty dose of serendipity” with which a text does or does not
endure beyond its moment of creation.12 This aesthetics of chance appears as well in
Caroline Levine’s New Formalist critique of the contextualist paradigm, wherein she
privileges moments when social forms collide and interact in ways counter to their
specific affordances and their capacities for organizing other forms. She insists that,
“amid the complex and aleatory overlapping of social forms, there are always
opportunities for unexpected and ideologically unsettling outcomes.”13
Such appeals to the unpredictability of aesthetic response flow readily from the
perceived determinism of the historical/contextualist paradigm. The chains of
necessity are readily unlocked by the keys of chance, here embodied by individual
reader response and the stochastic outcomes of formal collisions. This in itself is not
surprising. As Ian Hacking has observed, “necessity and chance are twinned, and
neither can exist without the other.” Yet “neither explains the other, no more than
heads explains tails.”14 One is needed to think the other, but as idealized models of
the world (i.e., a fully determined universe or an inexplicably chancy one) they do
not overlap. Appeals to the unexpected need not imply such a dualistic view, but
they make it easy to slip into a rhetorical mode that privileges one universe over the
other—statistical nihilism over statistical determinism. At their most extreme, they
uncannily recall the most vociferous critiques of statistical thinking in mid-to-latenineteenth-century Europe and America. Consider Dostoyevsky’s lament in the
1860s that statisticians, for all their intent to “enumerate the good things of life” and
for all their love of humanity, always omit one particular thing: “One’s own free and
unfettered volition, one’s own caprice, however wild, one’s own fancy, inflamed
4

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

sometimes to the point of madness — that is the best and greatest good, which is
never taken into consideration because it will not fit any classification, and the
omission of which always sends all systems and theories to the devil.”15
Literary studies is arguably still enmeshed in the epistemological legacy of this prior
moment, which saw the “taming of chance” through an elaboration of methods for
reasoning between absolute necessity and absolute chance; for imagining a universe
where “blind Chance stabilizes into approximate Law”; for reasoning, in a word,
probabilistically.16 After all, does not appeal to the “unexpected” require that we
posit a horizon of possibilities against which expectation is judged? Do we not imply
a typical or regular pattern against which the unexpectedness of some aesthetic
response, or moment of artistic evaluation, is deduced? All modern academic
disciplines came of age under the “empire of chance” that the statistical revolution
set into motion, each finding its way toward conceptual and methodological
vocabularies for contending with indeterminacy. In literary studies, however, this
vocabulary has remained impoverished by comparison, in part because an emphasis
on the irreducibility of aesthetic experience and the particularity of individual works
(the idiographic) makes it easier to reject regularity or inevitability of any kind (the
nomothetic). It is black swans all the way down. And yet if the discipline has, like
Dostoyevsky, strongly defended caprice, it has less often reckoned with how its ideas
about chance are the historical product of the same taming that has radically
reorganized other disciplines.17
One motivation for expanding probabilistic reasoning in literary study is the
increasing access that digitization has provided to information about the past. Not,
however, because this wealth of data more accurately captures the true regularities
against which the horizons of chance can be measured. All data is partial and
positional and will never say enough about the probability of events as singular as,
for instance, the selection of a book for one’s personal library of world literature.
What an expansion of probabilistic reasoning does offer, I argue, is a richer set of
models for reconciling the partiality of data with the partiality of our own subjective
judgments and beliefs about the likelihood of an event. For expressing, in other
words, these judgments as a matter of degree and not a matter of kind (e.g., necessity
and chance).

5

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

Consider another instance of book selection on Maruzen’s second floor, this time
from novelist Tayama Katai, who recalled his visits to the store around 1901.
It was at that time that I often went with Yanagita Kunio to find and
read books like those. Like parched individuals coming to water, we
searched through the listings at the back of books and the
advertisements at the back of magazines. We’d then spend money we
didn’t have and order those rare books at Maruzen.
I first came to know Maupassant’s name from a short-story collection
called Odd Number, which my friend Ueda owned. I subsequently
bought Pierre et Jean at a Western booksellers in Nikkō, but at the time
no one really knew what kind of writer he was or how he ranked among
others. Based on the wholesome stories included in Odd Number, even
I thought of him purely as a writer of beautiful short stories that took
love as their theme. But of course, while Maupassant did write such
things, he was more than that. I soon learned how very different he was
from the likes of Daudet.
One day I went to Maruzen’s second floor. As was my routine, I flipped
through the pages of the books with the largest listings and, by chance,
discovered that Maupassant’s Short Stories had been published in a
cheap series of 10 or 12 volumes. I was thrilled beyond words. I ordered
it without thinking about the cost.18
To purchase the series, Katai ultimately had to beg for an advance on a travelogue
that he had under contract. Cheap and ragged though the books were, he was proud
to be the first person in Japan (or so he assumed) to get hold of them. They gave him
such pleasure that he remembers, over fifteen years later, “stroking and petting
them” upon receipt.19 At once a story of personal preference and affective response,
wherein Katai’s desires are met by the chance appearance of Maupassant’s Short
Stories amid hundreds of listings, it also hints at specific material and social factors
on which this miraculous find was conditioned. A precarious financial situation; a
shared interest amongst peers; a broad enough domestic appeal that a provincial
bookseller had Maupassant’s works in stock (he was the most translated author of
the Meiji period, by one estimate); a foreign publishing industry that deemed it
profitable to issue his translations in cheap, mass-market form.20 What in the act of
discovery feels like one of Hesse’s thousand pathways seems, with added context
6

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

and in retrospect, to be one of a narrower set of possible outcomes. Not an entirely
predictable choice, as if predestined, but also not pure chance.
To reason about Katai’s selections from the vast trove of world literature is to find
ourselves reasoning probabilistically. How much do we believe his particular
experience of world literature stemmed from the freedom of choice idealized by
Hesse? How much was it bound by social and material factors that narrowed the
range of paths through this trove? Katai knew that “the great waves of thought from
the European continent” arrived in Japan in a particular form. Elsewhere he
describes “the magnificent scene of Nietzsche’s sermons, Ibsen’s disobedience,
Tolstoy’s self, and Zola’s dissections making their way into our three-thousandyear-old island temperament…Of course, I don’t know whether they initially arrived
correctly, or to what degree they were understood, or if they came undistorted and
unwarped. At any rate, the fact is that they rushed into our nation’s literature…like
a kind of violent, awesome gale.”21 Bibliomigrancy is here figured as a chaotic surge
of all manner of thought that leaves trails of debris whose patterns are unpredictable
and yet not totally random. This essay asks how quantitative evidence about the
literary past can intervene in the ways we reason between this gap at different scales
of world literature’s materialization.

Between Fate and Chance
The quantitative evidence I use in this essay is of a basic kind, providing the barest
traces of the debris pattern left by Katai’s “violent, awesome gale.” Basic does not
mean simple, however, nor simply obtained. In this case the traces are based on two
bibliographic resources that give an account of published translations into Japanese
for the Meiji period (1868-1912) and the years 1912-1955. The Meiji period is
covered by the Meiji-ki hon’yaku bungaku sōgō nenpyō, a comprehensive
bibliography of 4,510 literary translations, including fiction and poetry, published in
newspapers, magazines, and individual books. Each entry lists the year of
publication and the source author’s home country.22 The later time span is covered
by an 800-page index published by Japan’s National Diet Library in 1959. Its nearly
28,000 entries, representing works in all genres by 2,398 foreign authors, include
metadata about the author’s country of origin, publication year(s), translator, and
publisher.23 Unlike the Meiji bibliography, this one focuses just on stand-alone

7

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

volumes, including reprints, which makes it blind to the mass of translated material
published in general interest and small coterie magazines of the period and biased
toward prose fiction. Both resources are mostly blind to literature outside of EuroAmerica and Russia, reflecting the conventional association at this time of “foreign”
and “world” literature with the “West.”
At this scale of abstraction, there are indeed many reasons to be concerned about the
erasures made by these bibliographic traces. For one, differences in medium, genre,
and publication context are blurred by the treatment of any translated title as
commensurable with any other. Also obscured is the amount of textual traffic
occurring via “relay translation,” whereby texts were translated from other
translations, not the original source language. Nonetheless, insofar as they
approximate the relative quantity of material being translated and published, as well
as the relative distribution of attention across dominant national literatures and
writers, they are a point of first entry into investigating the patterns of
bibliomigrancy that structured literary importation and influence in these periods.
Taken alone, they can suggest how levels of literary translation fluctuated relative
to publication levels overall, highlighting moments of heightened or diminished
attention to foreign literatures.

8

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 1: Translations of foreign literature by year as a percentage of overall publication, 1883-1942. “Meiji” refers
to the Meiji index, while “NDL_TS” refers to the National Diet Library index.

Figure 1 shows translations as a percentage of total publication from 1883 to 1942.24
Here we might notice the considerable dip interrupting the decade of stable rates
before 1912 and the sharp rise of the late teens. It would seem to confirm what
scholars have written about the chilling of Japan’s intellectual climate after the
“High Treason Incident” of 1910 and the fears it provoked in government officials
about the subversiveness of foreign thought.25 These bibliographic traces can also
tell a story about how “current” translators and publishers were from year to year in
their choice of texts. For instance, when we plot the median birth year of translated
authors (Figure 2), we see that they collectively looked further into the past around
the same time as the post-Meiji decline, and then again as the Pacific War (and also
government censorship) ramped up in the 1940s. Finally, the traces offer a window
onto who was most translated or reprinted in certain periods. When translations
ebbed from 1913 to 1918, for instance, it was Tolstoy, Goethe, Emerson, and
Maupassant who were most translated. Already we see how these data points enrich
a historical narrative about the impact of shifting political conditions on the
materialization of the world literary imaginary.

9

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

Figure 2: For each year of translation data, the weighted median of author birth years is calculated and subtracted
from that year, providing a measure of how “current” translated literature was in that year.

There is nothing novel about using bibliographic traces of this sort to study the
circulation of books between languages and national contexts. As early as 1955, the
literary historian Ōta Saburō compiled his own dataset from multiple card catalog
records to graph fluctuations in the quantity and national origin of literary
translations into Japanese.26 More recently, book historians and cultural sociologists
have argued that quantitative evidence has value for contextualizing acts of
translation and consumption because it bridges the gap between the literary and
historical, individual social actors and institutional structures, the book as personal
experience and commodity form.27 These arguments have helped further elucidate
how “the poetics of consumption manifest itself through the quantitative record,”
but they have also struggled with how to hold in suspension the bridge separating
event and (numerical) context.28 As with Mani, the bridge can morph back into a
wall partitioning events and contexts into incommensurable ontologies. Discrete acts
of reception, whose determining conditions cannot be fully enumerated nor captured
in all their dynamism, become instead icons of indeterminacy and contingency, each
miraculous in its own way. Empirical contexts, in contrast, serve to express an

10

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

underlying structure or order, yet their necessary abstractions render their relation to
particular events diffuse. One can think the event and liberate subjectivity with
appeals to inexplicable chance; or one can think context while appealing to
objectivity and causal explanation. But how to think the relation between them?
How to relate future discrete event to underlying context is a question at the heart of
philosophical debates around the taming of chance. As Lorraine Daston and other
historians have shown, the story of this taming is one of shifting ideas about the
certainty with which we can say that an event or outcome will come to pass (e.g., a
coin toss, a shipwreck, a suicide). Probability is at root a science for reasoning about
the limits of human knowledge. The taming of chance, which continues today, is
simultaneously a story of how the subjective beliefs informing this reasoning came
to be superseded by the assumed objectivity of numbers and the natural or social
regularities “discoverable” in statistical data even as the empire of chance expanded
from the domain of games and parlor tricks to insurance, law, medicine, and
eventually to most academic disciplines.29 At every stage methodologists and
applied practitioners have hotly debated the proper purview of probabilistic
reasoning, debates that play out now against the background of predictive algorithms
that threaten to reinforce and amplify existing social hierarchies.30
I am interested in these historical debates as a reservoir for conceptualizing the
relation of event to context, and present contingency to past knowledge. Literary
historians have been reluctant to tap this reservoir, in part due to an insistence on the
irreducible complexity and uniqueness of the phenomena we study. The reservoir’s
depths are too readily distilled into caricatures of its epistemological extremes, and
indeed, as Eric Hayot writes, must be so distilled in order to preserve the conditions
for the “restricted, self-enclosed existence” that may give “humanist ethos and
scientific desire their deepest meaning” but which is also a kind of imprisonment.31
At one extreme is the idea of probability as a totalizing and deterministic concept
that sees every event as predictable with enough statistical data; and on the other a
radical skepticism that sees uncertainty everywhere and is in fact a romantic (and
later post-structural) backlash to the first position. But the waters of this reservoir,
as Maurice Lee writes, are actually far murkier: “Even nineteenth-century
probability experts vacillated between competing models of chance: objective views
(actual probabilities in nature) versus subjective ones (expectations under conditions
of partial knowledge); descriptions of past events versus predictions of future ones;
11

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

degrees of belief regarding single outcomes versus the mass logic of frequentism (an
approach that eventually came to dominate the field but emerged unevenly over the
century).”32
Chance has always been a slippery notion, made no less so by its encounter with
mathematics in the eighteenth-century, statistics in the nineteenth and twentieth, and
large-scale predictive algorithms today. But we miss a great deal when we reduce
all the ways it has been reasoned about to two camps or fail to reflexively situate our
own thinking as a byproduct of this history. Here I will dredge up some of the
conceptual language of past approaches to probability and apply them to the discrete
acts of selection and evaluation that add up to the broad flows and patterns of
bibliomigrancy. I view these acts of selection through three frames, beginning with
anthologies of world literature, moving to global trends in library acquisition, and
then zooming back to the individual choices of translators and readers. With each
frame I use past forms of probabilistic reasoning to reason across the gap between
event and context and thereby expand the ways we have of thinking about the
unexpected.

Probable Causes
Thus far my only frame has been the singular act of plucking, whether via memory
or purchase order, a book from store shelves, which feels as if one is looking at the
vast currents of bibliomigrancy through the eye of a needle. Their discreteness,
however, makes these acts useful thought experiments. They are funnels of time and
possibility, controlling the flow of what comes before and what follows, like the
neck of an hourglass. At the point where infinite paths narrow to a single decision
before expanding out again, we can begin to reason about how probable was Katai’s
choice of Maupassant, or Akutagawa’s singling out of Baudelaire. Literary
historians and statisticians alike will likely say it is impossible to predict, though
their explanations for this impossibility would differ. The former might lean on the
subjective nature of aesthetic experience, as does Barbara Herrnstein Smith in her
classic study, Contingencies of Value. There she frames the experience of aesthetic
objects as a matter of “personal economy,” arguing that the “features,” “qualities,”

12

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

or “properties” of aesthetic objects are “the variable products of the subject’s
engagement with his or her environment under a particular set of conditions.” These
conditions are linked to material processes, cultural practices, and human needs, all
continuously transformed and redirected with each new encounter.33 With so many
dynamic variables in play, the odds that a given book or author is chosen at a
particular moment seems a matter of random chance. As predictable, to paraphrase
David Hume, as a miracle.34
Smith’s argument, which aims to destabilize Kantian notions of intrinsic aesthetic
value, ends at a critique of predictability itself. She concludes that there is “no way
for individual or collective choices, practices, activities, or acts, ‘economic’ or
otherwise, to be ultimately summed-up, compared, and evaluated: neither by the
single-parameter hedonic calculus of classical utilitarianism, nor by the most
elaborate multiple-parameter formulas of contemporary mathematical economics
nor by any mere inversion or presumptive transcendence of either.”35 The easy
conflation of individual with collective choices allows Smith’s critique to land more
forcefully than it might otherwise, but it is worth pausing to consider whether the
whole history of probabilistic reasoning can be summed-up in this way. In fact, when
it comes to individual choices and events, much of nineteenth-century statistics was
built on the idea that there was nothing to learn from them at all — that predictability
came from regularities across large numbers of similar events, not individual
variation. In considering Katai’s predilection for Maupassant, a frequentist approach
would insist on richer data about, for instance, the purchasing habits of aspiring
Japanese writers at the turn-of-the-century. Where Smith sees far too many variables
to precisely model an aesthetic response, a frequentist sees too little comparable
information to be certain in much of anything. For both, the ability to infer the cause
of Katai’s selection is impeded by different kinds of ignorance about the world.
The problem of how to assess one’s degree of ignorance about the world and square
it with experience or observation has been at the heart of probabilistic reasoning
since its emergence as a calculus of moral judgment and reason. I revisit these origins
and their metaphorics now to replay my running thought experiment in a classical
key. A canonical metaphor from probability’s classical period is the urn model of
causation, first articulated by the mathematician Jakob Bernoulli (1655-1705). To
wit, “imagine an urn filled with colored balls in some fixed proportion, from which
13

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

repeated drawings with replacement are made….The fixed but unknown proportion
of balls in the urn corresponds to the hidden causes, and the results of the repeated
drawings to the observed effects.”36 Bernoulli developed a theorem to specify the
number of drawings necessary to insure that the ratio of colored balls drawn “falls
within a certain margin of the true ratio with a given probability.”37 That is, it
guaranteed that in the long run, the ratio of observed frequencies will converge to
the “true” hidden ratio. The theorem also put a precise number on how many
observations warranted what degree of certainty about this ratio. While the number
turned out to be far too large to be meaningful in practical terms, the urn metaphor
helped to expand the “art of conjecture” beyond games of chance, for which
calculations of probability generally assumed equally possible outcomes (e.g.,
rolling dice), to “more complex and interesting situations like human diseases and
the weather.”38 It expressed a relation between hidden causes and observed effects
such that the underlying mechanisms producing a given phenomenon could be
ignored as their effects necessarily replicated their true, proportional influence on
that phenomenon. More important was being able to assess one’s degree of
ignorance about this true ratio, whose truth was ultimately determined by God.
Bernoulli’s model was roundly critiqued for its problematic assumptions about the
stability of causes, especially as these assumptions pertained to moral, as opposed to
natural, laws. Leibniz, for instance, took aim at the model’s naive simplicity: “What
if the mix of balls contained in the urn changed with time? What if the number of
balls were infinite? What if no determinate ratio existed among the various types of
balls?”39 He was thinking specifically of its inadequacy for investigating illness.
How could such a model possibly represent the innumerable diseases that affect the
body in unknown proportions of deadliness. Running the bookstore scene through
this model, as if Katai were drawing from an urn of colored balls representing
multiple authors in varying proportions, we similarly confront the model’s
problematic assumptions. Surely his choice of Maupassant does not depend solely
on the proportion of works by him, Tolstoy, Zola, or other writers in circulation at
the time. Nor can we assume that these proportions were stable. Even if they were,
there is no reality in which Katai repeats his selection enough times that we can
reliably measure our ignorance of these proportions. All models are wrong, of
course, but this one feels especially wrong for the case at hand. Yet the fantasy of
having Katai choose over and over again, and the hypothetical question of whether
14

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

his choices converge to some ratio reflective of external determinants, begs the
question of what we as literary historians might imagine to fill this metaphorical urn.
What past causes are hidden inside, and which weigh the heaviest on future effects?
If we could watch a hypothetical Katai repeatedly draw from this urn, how would
our beliefs about these underlying probabilities change with each observation? How,
that is, does our sense of an event’s likelihood shift with how much we know about
the past?
Putting Katai’s singular act on repeat pushes this thought experiment to its breaking
point, but we can take it one step further. Indeed, the theoretical limits of Bernoulli’s
infinite draws are precisely what sparked a conceptual breakthrough in probabilistic
reasoning, shifting attention from the probability of observed frequencies given a
true, underlying ratio to the inverse calculation: given some observed frequency,
how likely is it to be an approximation of the unknown ratio or probability. “Or, as
the problem was more often posed, given that an event has occurred so many times
before, what is the probability that it will occur again on the next trial? In short, what
is the probability that the future will be like the past?”40 The calculus of such “inverse
probabilities” was first pursued by Thomas Bayes (1702-1761) and subsequently
refined by Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749-1827). Bayes’s crucial insight was to turn
probability into a measure of informed belief — a measure updated with each new
observation of a phenomenon. Lacking perfect knowledge of causes, he reasoned,
why not begin with the limited knowledge one has and judge the probability of an
outcome based on this initial ignorance. Assuming the causes are constant, one can
successively update this judgment as new knowledge arrives, thus providing an
increasingly precise measure of the limits between which it is reasonable to believe
that the true probability lies.41 Laplace would expand these ideas into a general
method for inferring the most likely cause of an event from all possible causes (e.g.,
the colors of balls in the urn). He did so in part by intuiting that the probability of a
cause (given an event) is proportional to the probability of the event (given its
cause).42 But he also followed Bayes in insisting that “probabilists must continually
correct their estimates of relative possibilities in light of new knowledge concerning
absolute possibilities,” where “relative” corresponded to initial guesses based on
ignorance and “absolute” corresponded to estimates based on actual observations.43
By 1814 he arrived at the equation known today as Bayes’ rule, the cornerstone of
Bayesian statistical inference.44
15

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

I am less interested in the specifics of this rule and its practical applications (Laplace
used it to estimate the accuracy of astronomical observations, male/female birth
ratios, and jury decisions) than the inferential step that injects a subjective guess into
its mathematical machinery. Replaying our thought experiment through this logic of
inverse inference, we are forced to confront our own initial guesses — our estimates
of “relative possibilities” — regarding the likelihood of Katai drawing Maupassant.
Or if these feel too hard to pin down amid the waves of personal whim and past
experience, we can shift the frame of reference to acts of book selection with
seemingly more stable social coordinates: editorial decisions by compilers of literary
anthologies. What happens to our initial guesses about the likelihood of this or that
author when our thought experiment moves from the bookstore to the publishing
house? And specifically to the publisher Shinchōsha, who began releasing its
Anthology of World Literature (Sekai bungaku zenshū) in 1927. If Maruzen was a
central clearinghouse of foreign literature for aspiring and elite writers, this
anthology was the gateway for the masses. Released in two separate stages (Part
Two began publication in 1930), the anthology totaled fifty-seven volumes in all and
was part of the enpon (one-yen) book boom that saw the rise of a competitive market
for cheap, multi-volume series of modern great books, older classics, and less highminded collections for the masses. Shinchōsha’s series emerged a clear winner,
selling more than 400,000 complete sets as compared with rival Kaizōsha’s “modern
Japanese literature” series, which sold just 250,000.45 Beyond Japan, it paralleled
developments in British and American commercial publishing that from the 1890s
saw the confluence of the “scholarly list” mode with the mass-market “enterprising”
mode to produce the “patriarchal capitalist” mode, which produced series like
Routledge’s “World Library,” “World Classics” by Oxford University Press, and
J.M. Dent’s “Everyman Library for Young People,” created in 1905 with the
ambition to publish 1,000 great works.46 By reducing an infinite sea of texts to a
curated selection, these series aimed to educate the masses and keep the lay reader
“out of the grog shop or away from newspapers.”47
The Shinchōsha anthology’s affinity with the patriarchal capitalist mode is made
clear in a two-page newspaper ad that equated it, in content and cost, to Everyman’s
Library.48 This was pure salesmanship in terms of the actual number of works, but
Part One of the anthology includes many of the same authors and titles. Dante,
16

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Goethe, Milton, Shakespeare, and Cervantes were there to represent the classics;
Hugo, Balzac, Dickens, Flaubert, Maupassant, Tolstoy, Turgenev, Dostoevsky, Poe,
and Hawthorne stood in for the nineteenth-century novel; Chekov, Gorky,
Maeterlinck, Ibsen, and Hamsun, among others, added more contemporary fare
(Table 1).49 Series editor, Satō Giryō, also framed the anthology as part pedagogical
and part civilizing mission, touting it as a “giant textbook for the study of humanity”
and “a necessary qualification for being a global citizen.”50 But the masses were not
the only market that he and Shinchōsha were after. Or rather, they knew that the
works had to appeal just as much to those writers and intellectuals who could confer
on them the necessary cultural capital. When the prominent political theorist
Yoshino Sakuzō authored a promotional piece in the Tokyo Daily Newspaper
(Tokyo nichinichi shinbun), he quoted a friend who, upon seeing the two-page ad,
exclaimed that every title, to the very last one, was “food for the soul and a work
that should always be close at hand. I want them all so bad I’m ready to rush out and
get them.”51 This was a textbook for the masses as much as an ornament displaying
that one had absorbed the lessons contained therein.

Author
Dante
Boccacio
Shakespeare
Cervantes
Milton
Walter Scott
Rousseau
Goethe
Poe
Nathaniel Hawthorne
Victor Hugo
Alexandre Dumas
Balzac
Charles Dickens

Translated Work(s)
Divine Comedy
Decameron
Hamlet, Romeo and Juliet
Don Quixote
Paradise Lost
Ivanhoe
Confessions
Faust
Selections
Scarlet Letter
Les Miserables
Count of Monte Christo
Selections from The Human Comedy
Tale of Two Cities

17

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

Emile Zola
Flaubert
Guy de Maupassant
Ivan Turgenev
Dostoyevsky
Tolstoy
Chekhov
Maxim Gorky
Sienkiewicz
Henrik Ibsen
Bjornson
Knut Hamsun
Strindberg
Thomas Hardy
Joseph Conrad
D’annunzio
Daudet
Hauptmann
Maurice Maeterlinck
Schniztler
Anatole France
Henri Barbusse
Charles Phillipe
Bernard Shaw
John Galsworthy
Synge
Rostand
Romain Rolland

L’Assommoir
Madame Bovary
A Woman’s Life
Fathers and Sons, Virgin Soil
Crime and Punishment
Resurrection
Selections
Selections
Quo Vadis
Selections
Selections
Hunger
Confessions of a Fool, Dance of Death
Tess of the D’urbervilles
Selections
Triumph of Death
Sappho
Selections
Monna Vanna
Selections
Thais, Crainquebille
Hell
Bubu of Montparnasse
Selections
Selections
Selections
Cyrano de Bergerac
The Wolf

Table 1: Authors and works anthologized in part 1 of Anthology of World Literature.

Such paratextual evidence already constrains initial guesses about the likelihood of
specific authors appearing in the anthology. It allows us to situate these guesses
within a set of possible editorial intentions and strategies. For instance, we might
situate them in Bourdieu’s familiar notion of a “dual discourse,” which argues that
the democratization and mass production of a culture’s “classics” is always partly
an opening up of knowledge only after it is “permitted, authenticated and ultimately
cheapened by the upper strata, whether these are the aristocrats and officials who

18

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

endorse the books or the professionals and intellectuals who edit and publish
them.”52 This might raise in our minds the weight of older, already canonized authors
and works and, depending on our ideas about the canon, make Goethe, Maupassant,
or Tolstoy feel more or less predictable. Digging deeper into the historical context
might unearth more prosaic rationales behind these editorial choices, prompting us
to revisit our initial guesses. As Mary Hammond observes about Oxford’s “World
Classics” series, whether a work was out of copyright and cheap to acquire, its length
suitable to the series’ format, and its content inoffensive to lower and middle-class
readers often took precedence over aesthetic merit or canonical recognition. In the
case of Shinchōsha, it had been acquiring and publishing literary translations for a
decade, and more than 60% of the titles in Part One appeared in earlier formats.53
Moreover, Satō was adamant about including works he deemed highly legible to
mass audiences, taking extra steps to edit each translation for clarity even if it had
previously been published.54 Such evidence is bound to shift our calculus of
probabilities yet again, increasing our certainty about Satō’s selections relative to
his immediate context while making them look increasingly contingent relative to
larger patterns of bibliomigrancy. The more we contextualize his path through world
literature, the more it feels like one in a thousand. But at what point do we begin to
say this path is random or unexpected?
At issue here is how the perception of chance varies with contextual clues. How do
we convince ourselves that Satō’s path was more or less random? And relative to
what? As literary historians, we often use contextual clues to explain away variation
and hone our estimates of what seems most likely or probable. As strict Bayesians,
we would start from a decidedly more naïve position. For both Bayes and Laplace,
in fact, the safest initial hypothesis in the absence of any observational evidence was
to assign equal probability to every possible cause (e.g., if it was our first day on
Earth, we would say that the sun is as likely to rise tomorrow as not). This “uniform
prior probability” constituted an initial baseline to be updated with each new
observation until it more closely approximated the true underlying probability of an
event (e.g., the sun always rises). Applied to our thought experiment, we could start
with the assumption that every foreign author was as likely to be selected by Satō
for the Shinchōsha anthology as any other (i.e., each was represented by the same
number of colored balls in the imaginary urn). This seems absurd, of course, not
least because we cannot watch Satō draw successive balls from this urn and thus
19

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

have no way of updating our beliefs about its composition. Yet what if we imagined
his draws not as a starting point but as an endpoint in a long succession of picks by
Shinchōsha and other publishers from the same urn? How probable do his selections
look in light of the many selections made before him?
In positing this scenario, I understand that the probabilistic calculus I am asking for
is not formally viable.55 My point is to ask how bibliographic data can be reframed
as evidence that can inform our subjective guesses about chance. Before tethering it
to an objective historical reality, as might be the initial impulse, what if we regard it
as evidence for updating our prior beliefs? Against this revised baseline, how
unexpected do Satō’s choices look? Sticking with the urn metaphor, I represent this
evidence as the proportion of translated works by each author for a given period. In
the National Diet Library dataset, there are 5,892 titles representing 749 unique
authors translated between 1912 and 1927. Filtering out authors with one title leaves
400 authors. Figure 3 visualizes their proportional representation across the period,
colored by whether they were included in Shinchōsha’s anthology or not. All
included authors are labeled, in addition to the top 50 most translated overall. As a
measure of the past attention given to an author, proportion leaves a lot to be desired.
Were such data available, we might re-weight these circles according to the ages of
the authors, their total output, or the size of print runs, thus leveling out the natural
advantages afforded authors who had more works to be translated or correcting for
low counts belying a work’s actual success in the marketplace. Even with this
simplistic representation, however, we can begin to reason differently about Satō’s
editorial decisions.

20

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 3: Proportional representation of all translated authors from 1912 to 1927. Blue indicates inclusion in Part
One of the anthology; red indicates inclusion in Part Two; and white means an author was not included.

Note that a majority of the colored circles are also the largest, suggesting that prior
prominence in the market raised the likelihood of an author’s selection. Many of
Satō’s choices look rather conventional in light of past evidence. Other choices look
surprising by contrast. The smaller colored circles at the outer edges highlight cases
where the motivations for inclusion were driven by more than just market success or
availability. The choice of Norwegian novelist Johan Bojer (1872-1959), for
instance, seems highly idiosyncratic and unexpected in light of past publications.
What was motivating his inclusion? Also surprising is the choice to exclude authors
at the center of the figure. Why not grant to Leonid Andreyev (1871-1919) or
Pushkin (1799-1837) the same level of recognition as their equally popular
countrymen? The figure itself provides no answers, but it does frame further
21

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

qualitative inquiry in ways different than had we started with other evidence (e.g.,
information about individual authors, our preconceptions of the world literary
canon). These would have biased in other ways our reasoning about the probability,
and also conventionality, of Satō’s selections.
Just as the bibliographic data helps us reason about these selections with respect to
the past, it also allows us to reason about their relation to future trends. If some
choices appear more conventional or unexpected at the time of anthologization, what
about when viewed in retrospect? Do they look like clever foresight or ill-timed
wagers? To do this, let us imagine each author’s record of translation into Japanese
as a temporal trend line, where for each year in the dataset we calculate the
percentage of total translations attributed to an author. These individual trend lines
can then be aggregated, showing how much collective attention is given to a set of
authors by the publishing market each year. For instance, authors can be grouped by
which part of the anthology they were included in, since the editorial calculus
differed slightly for each part. Authors selected for Part One tended to be older,
canonical figures, with a median birth year of 1836. Authors chosen for Part Two
skew younger, with a median birth year of 1876. For this second installment of the
anthology, Satō placed bets on authors like Jack London, Upton Sinclair, Aldous
Huxley, Thomas Mann, and Leonid Leonov, all relatively new to the translation
market. By plotting the trend for individuals or aggregate groups we can determine
if the moment of anthologization marked a break with past and future trends. Did it
add to the weight of past contingent decisions or was it the first to tip the scale?
We can assess the presence of such temporal breaks using the Chow Test, which
indicates whether linear models fit to subsets of a sample (i.e., the trend lines before
and after a specified break point) perform differently from one another and from the
trend line as a whole. A significant result (p < .05) means that the two subsets
perform differently enough to provide evidence of a “structural break” in the data
and a lack of continuity.56 Here I apply this test to the trend lines (calculated as a
moving average of the percent of all translations) for authors in the anthology, and
the aggregate trend lines of all authors in each part, using 1929 as the break point for
Part One and 1932 for Part Two. The results and corresponding p-values are
displayed in Figures 4 through 7. Across the results for individual authors, four
distinct patterns emerge: 1) Authors steadily or increasingly translated until
22

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

anthologization but less so after (Tolstoy, Chekhov, Shakespeare, Strindberg); 2)
Authors steadily or increasingly translated even after anthologization (Maupassant,
Dostoevsky, Poe, Balzac); 3) Authors minimally translated prior to anthologization
but more so afterward (Mann, Stendhal); and 4) Authors shown some interest
beforehand but very little after (London, Kuprin, Sinclair). This typology provides a
set of entry points for investigating how the anthology did (and did not) serve as an
inflection point in the consecration of aesthetic value for these authors, informing
hunches about the social impact of anthologization.

Figure 4: Chow Test plots for 16 most translated authors in Part One, ranked right to left, top to bottom.

23

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

Figure 5: Chow Test plots for 9 most translated authors in Part Two, ranked right to left, top to bottom.

24

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 6: Chow Test plot for all authors in Part One of the anthology.

Figure 7: Chow Test plot for all authors in Part Two of the anthology.

25

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

The aggregated trend lines push these hunches in yet other ways, adding to the
evidence we already have about the divergent social function of the anthology’s two
parts. For Part One, there is not significant statistical evidence of a structural break
(p = 0.79) at the year 1929. Despite a lot of variation at the author level, the aggregate
trend is consistently downward, suggesting that Shinchōsha bet on authors (46 in
total) whose fortunes in the translation market were on the way down, though
certainly not out. By 1950, their works still make up over 25% of all translations in
the dataset. With Part Two there is slightly more evidence of a break (p = .195)
because a clear, steady ascent prior to 1932 turns into a noisy trend line showing
varied levels of attention from year to year. Shinchōsha was placing bigger bets on
less proven authors, which paid off for Thomas Mann and Georges Duhamel but not
Jack London or Aleksandr Kuprin. Looking at the widely translated authors who
were left on the table (Figure 8), these latter bets look doubly misplaced. We can
imagine why Satō steered clear of Arthur Conan Doyle or Robert Louis Stevenson,
not wanting to dilute the anthology’s civilizing mission with the detective stories
and adventure novels for which the masses truly clamored. For authors like André
Gide and Herman Hesse, the lack of prior publications was perhaps reason enough
to ignore them. But what of Pushkin, Ferenc Molnár (1878-1952), or Kleist (17771811), who had been, and would continue to be, of interest to publishers? Most
strikingly, what of Baudelaire, for whom Akutagawa would have searched in vain
for even a single line?
These questions invite further speculation about the role of the anthology in
disseminating these and other foreign authors, a role that can only be fully
understood upon examining the broader historical reception of each. Satō’s choices
were simply one act of selection (or non-selection) in a diffuse, disconnected chain,
much of which is missing from the historical record. My aim is to consider how we
intuit the significance of these acts outside of preconceived judgments we would
otherwise bring to them, temporarily suspending these judgments with the aid of
bibliographic data and a naïve Bayesian logic. Not to override them, but to begin
from a different baseline for reasoning about the relative chances that a particular
book or author is plucked from the swirling currents of bibliomigrancy. How this
baseline can inform analysis of broader literary reception, especially as this analysis
probes beneath the surface machinery of material circulation, is an open question.
But at the very least it can set expectations about the likelihood of an author or work
26

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

coming to individual or collective attention at a given time and place, allowing us to
calibrate intuitions about the degree to which the fact of their being read was
burdened (or not) by the weight of past choices and preferential attachment.

Figure 8: Chow Test plots for 16 most translated authors not included in the Shinchōsha anthology.

Such a baseline can even be comparative if other editorial or institutional choices
are projected onto it. Areas of overlap and disjunction in these projections could hint
at the competing intentions of publishers and other agents of bibliomigrancy by
showing how they diverge from the same evidentiary baseline. Consider, for
instance, a projection based on a list of recommended titles from the Association of
Japanese Libraries. In 1918, the Association published a catalog for local librarians
27

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

who were trying to stock their shelves on limited budgets and finite expertise. The
subject area for Literature listed 85 volumes of translated works. Figure 9 visualizes
the proportional value of all authors from 1912 to 1918, with the Association’s
recommended authors in blue.57

Figure 9: Proportional representation of all translated authors from 1912 to 1918. Blue circles are authors
included in the Association of Japanese Libraries list of recommended works.

Right away we notice obvious commonalities and differences in the authors
anthologized by Shinchōsha and those recommended for library purchase. Tolstoy
and Goethe are sure bets in both cases, while Poe and Maupassant are glaringly
absent from the library list. Why was the Association reluctant to include the latter?
Looking at authors with few publications who were nevertheless recommended for
library purchase (Jack London and Thomas More) raises questions about how their
28

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

representativeness was rationalized in spite of little evident commercial interest.
Triangulating via a common baseline is a way to ground speculation about the
ideological or institutional motives of these two agents of bibliomigrancy against a
shared horizon of expectation. But it also exposes the fragility of the assumption
animating this Bayesian thought experiment and classical probability theory in
general: that there is a true ratio to which empirical observations converge. If such a
ratio existed, would six years of bibliographic data be enough to capture it? Or does
it make more sense to compress the time scale to account for the cultural weight
given to aesthetic innovation? No amount of longitudinal data, for instance, can
predict the sudden rise of a new author or work whose value lay precisely in its rarity.
What, finally, can a “true” ratio even mean when dealing with the compound results
of human judgment and not the constancy of physical processes?

The Laws of Frequency
For the classical probabilists, truth ultimately lay with God. Or if not Him, then with
a standard of reasonableness supposedly shared by intellectual and political elites.
Probability was a measure of one’s ignorance of these higher laws, whether the
natural laws ordering God’s creation or the moral laws of reasonable men. To update
one’s subjective belief through increased observation of the world was to close the
gap between belief and higher laws, approximated as they were by objective
frequencies. With the French Revolution and the rise of romanticism, however, this
classical model came crashing down. Increased social tensions “shook the
confidence of the probabilists in the existence of a single, shared standard of
reasonableness,” while romanticism came to identify reason itself with
“unanalyzable intuitions and sensibility.” By the 1830s, as historians have
documented, the classical interpretation of probability seemed “both dangerously
subjective and distinctly unreasonable.”58 In its place came an alternative
interpretation of probabilities as observed frequencies, effectively cutting the tie
between subjective and objective probability and subordinating the former to the
latter. It did not matter what beliefs one brought to the mental calculus of chance,
for the truths of the world could be found directly in empirical data. Laplace, in fact,
had hinted at this intellectual trajectory late in life because he “realized that where
large amounts of data were concerned,” the Bayesian approach and the new
frequentist model produced much the same results.59 As an avalanche of numerical
29

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

data started pouring out of state-run statistics bureaus in France and other parts of
Europe, it looked to a new generation of probabilists as though observed frequencies
were all that was needed to mark the limits of the humanly probable.
As Daston describes it, this transition signaled a move away from the moral sciences
of the Enlightenment, which took individual psychology as its primary unit of
analysis and was normative in orientation, to the social sciences of the nineteenth
century, which sought to describe whole societies and understand humans at the
group level. “The discoveries of the moral sciences were of what ought to be; social
scientists aspired to lay bare what is.”60 Early popularizers of frequentist approaches,
such as Siméon Denis Poisson (1781-1840) and Adolphe Quetelet (1796-1874),
conceded “that individual humans are too complex and diverse to serve as the basis
of science”; the causes behind individual actions and outcomes too varied to predict.
It is impossible to reason about why someone is a certain height, why they picked a
certain book, or why they took their own life. En masse and over the long run,
however, Quetelet and others argued that individual variance washes out to produce
meaningful statistical regularities wherein can be discovered the deeper causes
regulating a society.61 As Ian Hacking describes this revolution in thinking, “the
mathematics of probability and the metaphysics of underlying cause were cobbled
together by loose argument to bring an ‘understanding’ of the statistical stability of
all phenomena.” Even suicide, that most radical expression of free will, looked under
this new paradigm as an act whose methods and seasonal timing followed constant
proportions from one country to the next.62 It is hard to miss in this frequentist turn
the sleight of hand that substituted one truth (e.g., divine order, enlightened
rationality) for another (e.g., statistical regularity) — a “truth” just as partial and
arbitrary in its construction and no less susceptible to normative claims about how
people ought to be. Indeed, these ideas would form the quantitative bedrock of
eugenic thought in the latter half of the century. They also invaded nearly every
discipline and ushered in the reign of inferential statistics, whose tools and practices
are still deeply embedded in contemporary knowledge formations. Given its
pervasiveness, it is worth considering how, at the most basic level, the frequentist
outlook transforms my running thought experiment.
In subordinating subjective probability to the “truths” of large numbers, our focus
shifts from individual choices or events to their aggregated patterns. Under this
30

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

paradigm, the pertinent question becomes: how are the variable choices of writers,
publishers, and translators in Japan, when averaged out, distributed across the range
of available foreign works? Moreover, how does this distribution compare with those
of other social groupings? Probability is no longer a measure of one’s ignorance of
a higher metaphysical truth, but a measure of difference from some population
whose statistical regularities are taken as normative, or at least indicative of an
underlying stability in human action and judgment. One does not have to apply a
positivist interpretation to these regularities (e.g., that they index a set of values
unconsciously shared) to use them as a basis of comparison. Here I am curious
whether comparison with regularities observed elsewhere reveals anything about
how different or unexpected patterns of selection were in Japan. How does its
bibliographic record look relative to other countries at the time? Do the collective
choices about who and what to translate look divergent or “normal” when compared
with those made around the world in the early twentieth century? Does Tolstoy’s
dominance (titles attributed to him constitute 7% of all translations between 1912
and 1955) represent a peculiar national obsession, or does it align with contemporary
trends? To reason about such questions, I juxtapose the translation data from Japan
with catalog records from national libraries across the world, reconfiguring my
thought experiment as a test of population differences.
The two imaginary populations in this case are publishers in Japan and publishers
across the world from 1912 to 1955. Their choices about who to publish are a loose
proxy for the level of interest and attention given to specific authors by the many
agents of bibliomigrancy. The question now is whether, all else being equal, there
are significant differences in the choices made by publishers in Japan and those made
elsewhere. Did they choose Tolstoy, for example, over other foreign authors at a rate
significantly different than the rate he was selected by publishers outside Japan?
Would knowing this alter how we reason about the relative unexpectedness of
Tolstoy’s, or any other author’s, reception in Japan? To answer this means obtaining
a picture, however approximate, of who publishers around the world were choosing.
At the very least we need a sizable random sample of all the translations published
in other countries during the years of interest. Here I rely on a database created with
Virtual International Authority Files (VIAF), which group together name authority
files from 41 national libraries as well as from country-wide union catalogues and
other institutions and specialized databases. This includes many of the national
31

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

libraries in Europe, North and South America, the National Library of Russia, and
several libraries in the Middle East and East Asia. 63 These VIAF files act as unique
identifiers for authors, combining information about an author’s preferred and
alternate name forms with the original and translated works associated with these
names. Using these files, one can create a subset of authority files for just works,
aggregating data on the appearance of a single work across multiple languages to
generate a list of translations held in contributing libraries. Filtering down to
translations published between 1912 and 1955 (roughly 72,500) and grouping them
by author (over 32,000 in total) provides a global snapshot of the world literary
market roughly comparable to what we have for Japan.
To be sure, it is a distorted picture for reasons related to VIAF itself and the historical
structure of the global language economy. For one, the creation of VIAF files
requires coordination across different institutions, languages, cataloging systems,
and metadata schemas, leaving much room for error. According to an analysis by
Matt Erlin and Doug Knox, the files are heavily skewed toward the contemporary
period (post 1990); likely contain errors with respect to dates of first publication;
and sometimes fail to assign standard ISO three-letter codes to the language of
translation, making these files harder to include in analysis.64 For these and other
reasons, the global snapshot certainly undercounts the real number of translated
works. This does not necessarily make it a poor sample, however, unless the errors
lead to systematic biases. However, biases can also be introduced by historical and
material factors. In places where bilingualism or multi-lingualism predominate, or
where an audience exists for reading works in the original (French language
literature being an obvious case), certain authors may go untranslated and thus their
overall significance in the world market will be downplayed by a focus on
translations alone. Another potential bias stems from the use of individual volumes
as the unit of record. This privileges longer-form fiction published as single books
and means that writers who stuck to shorter forms are likely underrepresented,
particularly if their stories were often published as part of multi-author anthologies
or collections. The VIAF dataset ultimately provides but one picture of the world
trade in literature in the early twentieth century and will need to be supplemented
with others. Provisional as it is, its value comes from being an aggregate sample
across so many languages and national archives. It is worth imagining how even

32

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

such a partial picture can shift expectations for how far patterns of literary attention
in Japan deviated from this projected norm.
To do this requires some manipulation of the two datasets so that they are roughly
comparable. For the Japan data, this means first eliminating reprints of translated
works, which are not accounted for in the VIAF data. Filtering on unique authortranslator combinations leaves a total of 23,030 entries.65 This does not get around
the problem that the Japan data is more granular than the VIAF data because it counts
individual titles in collections and anthologies, not just discrete volumes. A more
commensurable dataset could perhaps be constructed from records in Japan’s
National Diet Library by searching for volumes attributed to all 2,400 unique authors
in the Japan translation data. For my purposes here, I stick with the original dataset,
but further work is needed to gauge how different the relative proportions of
translated works are from those generated by a volume-based count.66 For the VIAF
data, which also includes non-fiction, I adjust the total count of translations so that
it more closely reflects only the number of literary translations in the dataset. After
this adjustment the number of entries drops to 62,786.67 The final step is to compare
the proportions of entries by each author relative to these totals using a two-sample
proportion test. This statistical test compares two populations (e.g., publishers in
Japan and publishers around the world) to see if they differ significantly on a single
trait (e.g., preference for Tolstoy), the null hypothesis being that there is no
difference. The higher the difference in proportions, the more evidence there is to
reject the null hypothesis within some confidence interval.
Taking Tolstoy as an example, his 1,633 entries compose roughly 7.1% of the Japan
data. In contrast, his mere 90 entries in the VIAF dataset represent about .14% of the
total. A two-sample proportion test confirms that the difference of 6.95% is highly
significant (p = 0), with a confidence interval of ± 2.34. That is, if these proportions
adequately reflect the degree to which publishers in Japan versus publishers
elsewhere preferred Tolstoy, then we can easily reject the hypothesis that their level
of attention to him between 1912 and 1955 was similar. The confidence with which
we can reject the null hypothesis is bound to waver with the underlying data used,
but as we are interested in the relative difference in proportions and not absolute
counts, it will be less sensitive to minor fluctuations. Still, the question remains of
what this confidence gets us. Tolstoy’s extraordinary popularity in Japan has long
33

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

been noted by scholars, in part owing to earlier work on some of the same
bibliographic data used in this essay. In 1981, a group of historians interested in
Russo-Japanese inter-cultural relations counted the number of translated volumes
for the top 32 most translated authors and ranked them accordingly (Table 2). 68
Tolstoy’s dominance on this list has since sparked several in-depth studies seeking
to explain his cultural and intellectual force in Japan and later Korea, where writers
adopted the same predilection for Tolstoy and Russian literature in constituting their
own national literature.69 But if the Japan data already suggested how normative was
his influence there, only by comparing it against the VIAF data can we see how
abnormal this persistent influence was compared with other parts of the world. His
dominant presence in one materialization of world literature looks less predictable
when viewed through the lens of another.
Author
Tolstoy
Maupassant
Lafcadio Hearn
Chekov
Goethe
Dostoyevsky
Poe
Gide
Gorky
Hesse
Turgenev
Doyle
Valéry
Balzac
France
Schnitzler
Rolland
Strindberg
Baudelaire
Thomas Mann
Pushkin
Mérimée
Gogol

Number of Works
2,608
1,753
1,128
1,110
859
757
522
519
495
415
402
364
359
324
311
265
260
236
230
220
210
204
200

34

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Wilde
Stendhal
Philippe
Maugham
Shakespeare
Heine
Molnar
Maeterlinck
Garshin

192
182
181
180
179
176
166
154
139

Table 2: Top translated authors into Japanese, 1868-1955.

Repeating this analysis for the most translated authors in Japan reveals that the
disproportionate interest given to Tolstoy in this period was among the highest of
any author. Figure 10 displays the 30 authors with the greatest proportional
difference from the VIAF data. Tolstoy is fourth from the top. Looking down the
list, we are confronted with yet another arrangement of familiar names, although
now selected and sorted according to a frequentist logic and informed by the
compound choices of translators, publishers, and libraries across a forty-year span
and across dozens of countries. At this scale, the path of world literature in Japan
has been narrowed to a seemingly random assortment of Russian (Vsevolod Garshin,
Tolstoy, Chekhov), French (Valéry, Maupassant, Prosper Mérimée), American
(Hearn, Emerson, Poe), and German (Theodor Storm, E.T.A. Hoffman, Hesse,
Kleist, Goethe) writers who Japanese agents of bibliomigrancy revisited and
revalued more often than their counterparts elsewhere. Here, however, the
randomness is bounded by baseline evidence about who was being widely translated
and circulated outside of Japan. Where the shelves of Maruzen and the editorial
decisions at Shinchōsha had provided an opportunity to gauge the likelihood of
individual choices against base rates of translation in Japan, the VIAF data provides
a way to gauge the likelihood of collective decisions in Japan against those
elsewhere. This is an image of world literature defined by who was being translated
domestically, but also by who was being translated in inordinate amount relative to
other places.

35

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

Figure 10: The 30 authors with the greatest proportional difference from the VIAF data. For reference, the difference
for Garshin is 264% and for Strindberg 7.8%. All differences are statistically significant.

What, now, to do with this image? Should it change our certainty about the chances
of these authors being translated and read in Japan? The previous thought experiment
told us that the chances of Tolstoy or Maupassant being plucked from the swirling
currents of bibliomigrancy was already high by the late 1920s. These results are
further evidence of how predictable such choices were for Japanese consumers of
translated literature. Asked to wager on the likelihood of any writer pulling Tolstoy
from the shelves of Maruzen or from personal memory, knowing that this writer
lived in prewar Japan, we might be willing to bet more money on him than other
authors. But would we be as confident about Mérimée (1803-1870), the French
Romanticist best known for Carmen; Theodor Storm (1817-1888), a central figure
in German literary realism; or the Russian Garshin (1855-1888), who tops the list
but is probably the most obscure of any author in Figure 10?
The response to this question will depend, first of all, on how willing one is to treat
the VIAF baseline as an adequate approximation of global patterns in translation. It
will also depend on how one figures the act of selection and at what scope. The more
one insists on contextualizing the act as contingent on a particular writer acting at a
36

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

particular place and time, the easier it will be to reject this coarse baseline for the
elegance and mystery of caprice, which can seem the more rational explanation once
one starts enumerating all the many variables that potentially impinge on a single
decision or outcome.70 But it is worth noting that this process of enumeration will
itself depend on whatever subjective beliefs and predispositions one brings to the
betting table. Indeed, cognitive psychologists have argued that such beliefs typically
override the most basic principles of probabilistic reasoning and statistical inference.
If I hesitate to wager much on Garshin, whose influence on Japanese letters feels
improbable to me even as the data tells me to believe otherwise, perhaps this says
just as much about me as it does about the data.

Seeing is Believing
The notion that one’s degree of certainty in a given outcome corresponds to the
amount one is willing to wager on it is an old idea in probability theory. In the case
of Garshin, my sense of his improbability, based on my ignorance of him prior to
this study, corresponds to a reluctance to bet much at all. A scholar better versed in
Russo-Japanese literary relations might wager more, although in truth Garshin has
received scant mention in scholarship to date. We can debate whether such wagers
are a reasonable proxy for subjective probabilities, but mine would undoubtedly
diverge from others based on prior knowledge and experience. Indeed, these
differences, as we know, are what a Bayesian framework tries to account for by
directly incorporating subjective probabilities into its calculus. Yet it also ties them
to observed frequencies such that they are updated when one obtains new empirical
evidence.71 Allowed to run its course, this idealized, rational calculus will produce
probabilities with little relation to the wagers we make on the spot with only
individual experience to guide us. But how are they different, exactly? What is the
mind doing instead when making predictions under uncertainty? How far does it
stray from the codified rules of probability theory?
In the 1960s and 70s, an entire sub-field of cognitive psychology emerged to tackle
such questions. As the Bayesian framework experienced a resurgence after over a
century of Frequentist hegemony, new research programs grew up around a theory
of the reasoning mind as Bayesian statistician.72 Some of the most influential
experiments designed to test this theory were carried out by Amos Tversky and
37

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

Daniel Kahneman, who aimed to show that the human mind, when making
judgments or predictions under uncertainty, relied on a small number of “heuristic
principles” that reduced “the complex tasks of assessing probabilities and predicting
values to simpler judgmental operations.” These were in general quite useful but
could “sometimes lead to severe and systematic errors.”73 Particularly egregious
were errors caused by “base-rate neglect,” which was understood as the tendency to
ignore prior probabilities (base rates) for other kinds of diagnostic information.
Tversky and Kahneman consistently found that when test subjects were presented
with “real-world” problems and asked to give the probability of a particular
outcome, their predictions were typically guided by irrelevant heuristics or
circumstantial evidence rather than by a consideration of base rates. For the
statistician, such neglect was tantamount to ignoring the most solid piece of
information one had for calculating the probability of an event.
Tversky and Kahneman were interested in how the mind made predictions about the
world that flew in the face of basic statistical rules, at least as these had come to be
institutionalized by the 1970s (e.g., the effect of sample size on sampling variability;
a regression to the mean). They enumerated several heuristic principles that subjects
relied on when presented with a real-world probability problem, each generating its
own kind of systematic error. The first was representativeness, which was the
tendency of subjects to disregard prior probabilities (base rates) and expected
predictive accuracy when they were given individuating information or “diagnostic”
information. For example, when asked to predict the likely profession of a person
(e.g., lawyer or engineer), and provided a brief description of their character traits or
habits, subjects made predictions based on how well the description conformed to
common stereotypes of lawyers or engineers, not on the given base rates of each
profession within the population.74 A second heuristic that Tversky and Kahneman
identified was availability, which was the tendency to assess “the frequency of a
class or the probability of an event by the ease with which instances or occurrences
can be brought to mind.” This ease of bringing to mind was prone to many kinds of
bias, all of which contributed to the over or underestimation of probability: bias due
to the retrievability of an instance (e.g., lists of names with more famous people were
given more predictive weight); to the salience of an instance (e.g., how recently had
one seen a car crash); to the effectiveness of a search set (e.g., abstract words were
judged to be more frequent than concrete words given their higher availability of
38

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

contexts); or to the imaginability of an instance (e.g., the risks of an expedition will
be overestimated the easier it is to construct possible contingencies, and vice versa).
Finally, a third heuristic was adjustment and anchoring, which refers to the tendency
of subjects to overestimate the probability of conjunctive events (i.e., a series of
events that occur in succession) and to underestimate the probability of disjunctive
events (i.e., complex sequences of events where failure of one event to occur can
lead to overall failure).75
Research into human judgment under uncertainty has progressed well beyond the
preliminary findings of Tversky and Kahneman, becoming only more relevant in an
age of data-driven journalism and disinformation warfare. But this early work is still
worth highlighting for the ways it puts rational probability theory and subjective
probability into dialogue. One lesson to take from it is not that we should reason
more like the idealized statistician, but that there is value in being self-aware about
the particular ways the mind deviates from what this ideal reasoning would predict.76
How might an awareness of our heuristic principles, whether as effect of cognitive
tendencies or disciplinary habits, help literary historians recalibrate their encounters
with empirical data? When we celebrate the unexpected readings generated by these
principles, enacting our own version of base-rate neglect, what biased judgments do
we wind up privileging instead?
The juxtaposition of a notional ground truth against individual bias recalls Barbara
Herrnstein-Smith’s appeal to “personal economy” as that which invalidates any
attempt to objectively predict the value of a work. If readers invariably price artistic
objects “in relation to the total economy of [their] personal universe,” then all we
have is personal bias to guide value judgments.77 John Guillory took issue with
Smith on this point in Cultural Capital, insisting that her philosophical critique
ignored the actual circulation of values. “It is only in the graduate seminars that one
can have the thrill of experiencing the ‘contingency’ of value, a thrill which is
produced by the very connotations of the word ‘contingency,’ its broad hint that
values are merely arbitrary, that they have no ultimate determination beyond chance
and circumstance. Any analysis of objective social relations will on the contrary
reveal that both ‘values’ and the discourse of value are historically determined as
objective social facts.”78 Contorting our ears a bit, it almost sounds as though
Guillory is warning against the dangers of base-rate neglect.
39

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

His warning, however, sticks to the language of economics, critiquing Smith for
neglecting the fundamental imbrication of use value with exchange value.
Specifically, he argues that “uses” (e.g., of a book by a reader) “are not simply
chosen from amongst a potentially infinite number of equal possibilities (aesthetic,
political, moral, hedonic) but are complexly articulated in nested hierarchies
according to the relation between the specific domains of the social named by such
categories as the aesthetic, the political, the moral, the hedonic.”79 To suggest, as
Smith does, that the contingency of such uses relies on the “scrappiness” of human
behavior, making them irreducible to any single measure of value, is to suggest that
this contingency exists wholly prior to experience. Guillory, in opposition, insists
that it is “certain social relations that select certain contingencies as consequential.”80
To ignore these relations is to misunderstand individual choice or need as somehow
free of external constraints, when in fact one’s personal economy is already
prefigured by political economy (i.e., the commodification of works of art as objects
of exchange and (in)utility). However irreducible or unexpected the “uses” of a work
might seem at the level of individual readers, they are delimited in advance by social
relations encoded in a work’s “exchange” value, whose criterion decidedly does not
resist any single calculus: “its measure is money.”81 To the extent Guillory sees
exchange value as a check on the range of likely use values, there is a conceptual
analogue in the idea that base rates, among other statistical rationalizations, are a
counterweight to the heuristic principles that the mind gravitates to under
uncertainty. To neglect either is to let human scrappiness extend the range of the
probable in ways that a deliberate accounting of the socially and historically possible
will not always warrant.
To be clear, my aim is not to force a choice between use value and exchange value,
or subjective probabilities and objective statistical baselines, but to attend to the
dialectic tension that obtains between them when historicizing textual encounters.
Treating the results about which authors were translated into Japanese in greater
proportions relative to other parts of the world as a kind of base rate—a kind of proxy
for the accumulated exchange value of foreign authors in Japan—how does an
awareness of this rate interact with initial judgments about a given author’s relative
importance, or with what we predict to be the likely judgments of others? Returning

40

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

to Garshin, how does awareness of his apparent overvaluation in Japan’s literary
translation market color our reading of past encounters with his fiction?
Consider a short essay from 1940 titled “Garshin’s ‘The Red Flower’ and Myself,”
published in an obscure medical journal by one Yamanoi Aitarō. It opens with
Yamanoi’s personal reminisces of how he inexplicably came to be fascinated by this
story, one born of Garshin’s own experiences at the Saburova Dacha asylum, “in
particular its depiction of the life and emotions of a patient gone mad.” Yamanoi
tells us that he first encountered the story in its original Russian around 1917 at the
Nikolai Cathedral in Tokyo, the seat of the Japanese Orthodox Church since 1891
and a major conduit for the diffusion of Russian literature and thought into
intellectual circles. At the time he was taking Russian language classes there and
availed himself of the library reading room with its large collection of “rather
outdated authors”: Kuprin, Goncharov, Chirikov, Chekov, Gogol, Potapenko,
Garshin, and Korolenko.82
Yet aside from Gogol and Goncharov, these authors were not as “outdated” as the
major novelists who, even by this time, continued to hold sway over the translation
market, in particular Tolstoy, Turgenev, and Dostoyevsky. Garshin, together with
Chekov and Vladimir Korolenko, belonged to the 1880s generation of new writers
that followed in the shadow of these luminaries. The decade has been characterized
as “an anti-climactic time of ‘revolutionary pessimism,’ with routed revolutionaries
licking their wounds and the population cowed and silenced by official repression.”
While an oversimplification, as Russian literary historian Peter Henry notes, there
was a real sense among writers of an increasingly oppressive political situation, to
which some responded by rejecting the realist mode of their predecessors to
experiment with newer narrative forms and styles. Garshin “epitomizes the move
away from the broad canvas and the solid objectivity of the realist novel towards an
introspective and microscopic, often fragmentary, literary form, reflecting perhaps
the uncertainties and self-doubt of his times.”83 This move entailed, among other
things, an attention to the transcendental and hyper-real, a reliance on allegory and
symbolist imagery, and an interest in defending society’s underdogs, whether
infantrymen on the front lines of war (e.g., “Four Days”), railway linemen serving
the desolate expanses of empire (e.g., “The Signal”), or patients suffering in insane
asylums (e.g., “The Red Flower”). The last of these, written in 1883, refashions
Garshin’s personal experiences into an intimate and detailed account of manic
41

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

schizophrenia that shuttles between an intense focalization of unfolding inner
madness—the patient is increasingly convinced that a red poppy in the hospital
grounds harbors a Cosmic Evil—and a more neutral, “normative” perspective that,
embodied by the patient’s doctors, observes this growing obsession from the outside.
This shuttling sets up a tension between the normal world and its human agents on
the one hand, who are “content with surface realities...concerned with what is known
or knowable and consistent with a meaningful scheme.” And on the other, the
abnormal experience of the patient, which is “shown as infinitely richer,
transcending the limitations of reason, space and time” by collapsing multiple times
and identities, however paradoxically or illogically, into objects like the poppy or
the hospital, and which ultimately serves as the basis for “an alternative truth.”84
Of the roughly two dozen short stories Garshin wrote in his lifetime, “The Red
Flower” was a favorite of his contemporaries and particularly well-liked by his
adoring fans. In 1886, for instance, a public reading of the work provoked mass
hysteria. By one account, after twenty minutes of unruly ovation, Garshin had only
to pronounce the two words of the title before “the theatre was again seized with an
outburst of seemingly interminable applause.”85 Henry declares that Garshin was
“one of the most widely-read writers of his generation,” a popularity partly sustained
by his association with mental illness. When “an invisible, all-powerful force” sent
Garshin tumbling from a third-floor stairwell in 1888 and to his death a few days
later, this association became a fixture of his posthumous reception.86 The literary
aesthetics of the 1880s combined with popular theories of mental illness to produce
“a uniquely pre-decadent illness image” of Garshin that made him “an imagined
source of mass psychogenic contagion” while alive and, after death, preserved a
public memory of him as a saintly, “sublime nervous degenerate.”87 A half-century
on and a continent away, Yamanoi would perform his own pathological reading of
Garshin and “The Red Flower,” a story he couldn’t seem to get out of his head. A
few years after discovering it at the Nikolai Cathedral, during a visit to a museum in
Port Arthur commemorating the Russo-Japanese War (1904-05), he wondered if the
Russian-made straightjackets exhibited there were identical to those worn by
Garshin at Saburova Dacha. Later, he was tortured by the story’s hallucinatory
visions as he himself was admitted to a mental hospital for several years. In 1937,
recovering from a long bout with mental illness, he found the story again in Japanese
translation. Despite feeling no emotional response this time, it remained for him a
42

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

“fateful book.” It seemed as if the image of the red poppy might “race round behind
his eyelids endlessly, for as long as he lived.”88
This arc of reception from Garshin to Yamanoi seems almost too perfect. As if the
thousands of pathways Yamanoi could have cut through the swirling currents of
bibliomigrancy were swept aside for the only path ever possible. Contingency begins
to look like necessity, but also fate. This is partly due to the way he tallies up a series
of coincidences such that “The Red Flower,” in conspiratorial fashion, becomes a
cipher for his own biography. In pairing these coincidences with my own selective
summary of the archive, I further strengthen a sense of inevitability. At the level of
individual reader response (i.e., use value), where it is often hard to see beyond the
sparse details left to us by historical actors, this may be a satisfying outcome. If all
responses are equally probable, because equally unexpected, then any response
gleaned from the archive can begin to feel like the only one possible. But at the level
of Yamanoi’s material encounter with Garshin (i.e., exchange value), should we let
these same sparse details guide our judgment? Or does individuating information of
this sort, to use Tversky and Kahneman’s words, prime us to double down on one
conclusion at the risk of neglecting other relevant information (e.g., base rates)? Put
otherwise, how might attention to this extrinsic information shift our own mental
calculus about, for instance, the chances of a reader in Japan finding “The Red
Flower” in its original Russian in 1917? Or of rediscovering it in translation in the
1930s? Or, for that matter, of reading it pathologically? How does our perception of
these individual acts of selection change with evidence about the accumulated
selections made before them?
It may seem we have ended back up at Mani’s initial injunction to consider how the
material specificity of circulation shapes encounters with world literature as object
and idea. Aren’t these just the concerns of good old-fashioned book history?
Perhaps. But within the terms of this final thought experiment, our predictions about
the chances of a particular book being read at a particular time are no longer framed
as a choice between fate and chance, statistical determinism and pure randomness,
but instead as a continual negotiation between competing heuristics. At one end are
the habits of mind that lead us to privilege or overweight information in ways that
run counter to the established rules of probability theory. At the other are these very
same rules proposing a different formula for balancing subjective certainties with
the patterns found in bodies of collective evidence. The latter are not useful because
43

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

they provide a form of absolute objectivity against which subjective ignorance is laid
bare, as if these larger bodies of evidence were not themselves partial and shot
through with the biases of the actors and institutions that created them. Indeed, the
false objectivity of a concept like “base rate” is apparent as soon as we start asking
what that rate should be for 1917, or the 1930s, or the propensity to read Garshin
pathologically.89 The goal is not to eliminate the gap between competing heuristics,
but rather to entertain the thought that our judgments under uncertainty are enriched
when we consciously allow these heuristics to push and pull on one another.
Thus far, my own judgments about Garshin’s likelihood of being read in Japan have
oscillated between the minor particulars of a single reader and the broad patterns to
be found in publishing records and library collection practices spanning more than
four decades. If the latter is what brought attention to Garshin’s exceptional
reception in Japan during this period, it explains little of how such an accumulation
of value came to pass by 1940. For this we need to narrow the range of oscillation
and consider how the particulars in Yamanoi’s account might be paired with more
meaningful base rates. For instance, in the case of his discovery of Garshin in 1917,
a suitable base rate might attempt to capture the author’s overall popularity in Russia
or in the global market for foreign translations. Henry suggests that Garshin was
“one of the most widely-read writers of his generation,” a popularity sustained by
fans and critics well into the pre-revolutionary and Soviet periods.90 His stories also
found a wide audience in Europe and America. “By the turn of the century there
were translations in other Slavonic languages (Czech, Polish, Bulgarian, SerboCroat), Yiddish, French—Maupassant prefaced one such volume with an essay—
English, Dutch, Swedish, Danish, Spanish, Italian and Greek.”91 French may have
been the primary coin of the world Republic of letters in this period, but English was
an equally, and in some cases more, valuable currency for Russian fiction after 1885.
Garshin’s stories began to appear in British periodicals and short story collections
from the 1880s and 1890s, riding a “torrent” of translations unleashed at this time
and culminating in the “Russian craze” of 1910 to 1925.92 While this craze did not
garner him the degree of attention given to his more illustrious predecessors, it did
result in a standalone volume of seventeen stories published by Duckworth of
London in 1912 and included in its Reader’s Library series, a hodgepodge of “books
of individual merit and permanent value” by British, American, Russian, and French
authors.93 This became the source for the first Japanese collection of Garshin’s
44

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

stories, including “The Red Flower,” translated by Tanizaki Seiji in 1914 as part of
an early venture in the fledgling market for foreign literature anthologies.94
While such details, based on select bibliographic evidence, do not provide a robust
base rate, they can revise our initial judgments about the probability of Garshin’s
works being found at the Nikolai Cathedral in 1917. For one, they show us the barest
outline of a sequence of contingencies, both foreign and homegrown, that arguably
add up to a higher chance of these works arriving in Japan. But they also raise
questions about how Garshin’s local availability was sustained even as his fortunes
in the world literary market tailed off, at least according to the VIAF data. His
absence there may be an effect of how his works generally circulated, which was
more often through literary compilations than standalone volumes. Even
acknowledging the possibility of his being undercounted in the VIAF data, his
overvaluation in Japan is precisely because of the repeat publication of standalone
volumes. By the time Yamanoi rediscovered Garshin in translation, no fewer than
three standalone publications had appeared since the 1914 volume, each by a
different translator. This included a three-volume set of collected works published
in the early 1930s as part of a “World Masterpieces” series and the 1937 volume that
fell into his hands—a collection of five stories, including “The Red Flower,”
published as an Iwanami Bunko pocket paperback.95 Individual stories had also
found their way into a literature primer for high-school students (1925), an anthology
of foreign short-fiction (1925), and even volume 24 of the Shinchōsha anthology
(1929).96 Still, between 1912 and 1937, Garshin was only the 55th most translated
author according to the National Diet Library data.
To be clear, exploring the space of possible base rates is not about coming up with
a precise probability estimate. There are far too many variables in play at the level
of the single event and too many unknowns. Base rates are simply a lower bound
against which to evaluate the ceilings of our evolving hunches and presuppositions.
Garshin’s lower rank in 1937 (he would climb to 34 by 1955) may pull those ceilings
down on first glance, but we can push them up again by weighing evidence that
accounts for his relative value in other ways. Material factors, for instance, like the
fact that he circulated in pocket paperback form, or certain kinds of paratextual
evidence. Here too the idea of base rate can be loosely applied if we set Yamanoi’s
pathological reading against the dozens of instances where Garshin is described by
45

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

a critic, in a translator’s preface, or as part of some other paratext. Over and over
again we find Garshin framed through his bouts with mental illness and his eventual
suicide in a way that present his fiction, in particular “The Red Flower,” as a literary
key for unlocking the realities of acute neurosis and insanity. Other reasons are given
for appreciating his work, of course, but from the start there is an obsession with the
biographical fact of his having gone mad. We find it in the preface to Tanizaki’s
1914 translation and an accompanying newspaper advertisement; in a 1927 volume
on Russian literary history that recasts his “fragile and sensitive nature” as a
sacrificial martyrdom to the violence of modern society; and again in the
commentary of his translators in the 1930s, who further reinforce the martyr
narrative and the impulse to read “The Red Flower” autobiographically.97
Symptomatic readings of this sort would continue into the postwar period as even
more translations of his collected works entered the market.98
This repetitiveness can partly be attributed to the brevity of Garshin’s life and the
small size of his literary footprint, which facilitate easy condensation into a few
select traits. Several of these traits, in particular the image of him as a Christ-like
martyr able to absorb the darkness and evil of his time, have their origins in an essay
by the poet D.S. Merezhkovsky from 1893. This essay also memorialized Garshin
as a writer who could squeeze the complex stuff of the world down to its essence
and deliver this straight to the hearts of his readers through concentrated symbols.
These served as a stimulant, or even a poison, distilled from the inexplicable doubts
that had plunged Garshin himself into madness.99 Merezhkovsky fed the popularized
image of Garshin as a medium of mass psychogenic contagion, whose sensitivity to
the world is such that it opens up an affective channel to which others can attune
themselves. This image of Garshin as a sensitive receiver carries over into his
reception in Japan, if more subtly. Garshin’s heightened sensitivity allows him to
make visible a wider set of associations around the objects he depicts, as if one was
“hearing the sea through a shell found far inland”; to “directly and without
embellishment touch and enter into the essence of things”; to “spur the cold hearts
of people, rousing them from slumber and blowing love into their hearts”; “to
directly perceive the pain of others”; to nurture “an extraordinarily polished moral
sensitivity”; and to function like a “highly sensitive radio or delicate machine” that
picks up on emotions or feelings invisible to others.100 Judged against these repeated
allusions to Garshin’s sensitivity and his capacity for provoking affective response,
46

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Yamanoi’s own pathological reading, framed by his experience with mental illness,
looks increasingly like the most predictable response. Contingency at the individual
level becomes predestination at the collective level as Yamanoi taps into a mass
psychogenic hallucination gone global—a co-incidence of contingencies operating
as a sort of provisional stability or noncontingency against which any initial wagers
about his relative value must be reassessed.101 Yamanoi’s encounter is miraculous
and predictable all at once.

Foregone Conclusions
This final thought experiment brings us back to the familiar work of literary history.
Yet we return via a detour through modes of probabilistic reasoning meant to
defamiliarize this work as a simple binary choice between packing history into tidy,
determinist containers (i.e., the contextualist paradigm) or throwing all predictability
to the wind. A detour, moreover, meant to rethink this dichotomy as a productive
tension or negotiation between different heuristics for judgments under uncertainty.
All disciplines have wrestled with this tension for the better part of two centuries in
response to radical changes in their surrounding information environments. As
methods for recording and analyzing data have evolved across different fields of
knowledge, they have reshaped the ways that chance is perceived and spurred
intense debate over how to reconcile objective observations with subjective belief
and experience. In fields like literary history, where the latter is often the locus of
interpretation, this debate can morph into a polemic against the seductive pull of
statistical rules and computational instruments that promise to read the past for
evidence of patterns. Such patterns, it is insisted, obscure “human scrappiness” and
individual difference, or lack the complex subtleties of personal judgment (which, it
bears repeating, has its own internalized, often unconscious habits of pattern
recognition). The debate is an ongoing and necessary one, especially at a time when
massive new data stores mined by super-charged predictive algorithms induce
fantasies of taming chance absolutely even as they amplify the worst biases of human
judgment.102 My own detour through probabilistic reasoning has attempted to
illustrate that the debate has always involved an implicit negotiation between
competing heuristics, not a total subsumption of one by another. What might (world)
literary history gain if it more deliberately shuttled between these heuristics rather
than picked sides?
47

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

This essay has provided but one possible model of what such a history might look
like. If certain aspects of this model resemble recent work in book history, it is
because it participates in the latter’s elevation of “contingency” as an analytically
and rhetorically useful concept. Nan Z. Da attributes this elevation, in part, to the
semantic flexibility of the word, which allows it “to ‘scale’ from situational
variation...to larger uncertainties within populations over time”; from individual
encounters with books to the collective phenomena revealed by bibliographic data
sorted geographically. Larger scales, however, mean increased adoption of social
scientific concepts (e.g., variation and spread, spatial distribution patterns, models
of dispersal) and consequently, in Da’s estimation, a severe narrowing of “the
meaning of contingency down to either completely isolated circumstance or
combinatorial chance.”103 The result of this narrowing is a reductive sociology of
reading that overlooks the open-endedness of encounters with books and all the ways
that their “imprint on a life...does not translate into external signs.” Applied to world
literature, this sociology can slide into a “cultural essentialism” that treats the
bibliographic currents unique to non-Anglo-European readerships as having total
explanatory power over their reading lives—a discrete branch in the river leading to
an alternative universe all the more exotic for being the one not taken at the centers
of global cultural hegemony.104
For Da, the final lesson here is that the “empirical assessments of reading and book
use” must be rounded out by other approaches that “reemphasize the opacity of a
reader’s interactions with books that she might read with absorption or not: once but
thoroughly; or over long periods of time, but distractedly; or repeatedly, to different
effects.” I could not agree more. At the scale of individual lives and readers, where
so much evades capture by the historical record, it feels safest to bet, like Da, on the
“indeterminacy” of all that readers do with books.105 The anecdotal accounts by
Akutagawa or Katai or Yamanoi may themselves be an evasion of sorts, an attempt
to control the narratives of their reading lives. Do the empirical traces of
bibliomigrancy really matter if Yamanoi was simply entranced by his own
conspiratorial designs, seeing in “The Red Flower” all the contingencies of his life
linked together? He is like the story’s narrator, someone who sees in any object “all
its history” and for whom the world’s evils accumulate in the scarlet petals of a tiny
poppy.106 Yet how then to disentangle his or any account from our own? Where does
48

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

the “rounding out” of empirical assessments with indeterminacy turn into its own
kind of conspiratorial vision and own kind of blindness to the subjective biases and
preconceptions we bring to interpretations of the past? Conversely, if empirical
assessments are a way to relativize these biases, no matter that they introduce their
own, at what distance are they most helpful for relating use value to exchange value,
human scrappiness to collective regularity? These are open and irresolvable
questions. As I have tried to show, however, there are deeper conceptual reservoirs
from which to address them before circling around, once more, to indeterminacy as
the final explanans of how books travel and acquire meaning.
As my experiments in probabilistic thinking illustrate, judgment under uncertainty
has always been a more nuanced epistemological project than merely reducing
contingency to a fork in the road. Although I have only scratched the surface of how
such thinking has evolved over time, we have seen enough to recognize it is an
ongoing and unsettled project—an assemblage of tendencies rather than a single
totalizing system. Within this assemblage we find competing ideas about how to
reconcile empirical observation with subjective knowledge, group-level regularities
with individual stochasticity, probabilistic rules with cognitive heuristics. But we
also find in it a place for thinking the improbable and unexpected, a region existing
in productive tension with other worlds of probabilistic thought.107 How, indeed, can
the former be imagined without reference to the latter? And yet the appeals to
indeterminacy in literary history tend to leave the impression that it is an isolated
exclusion zone, a world closed off unto itself.
This essay has considered what (global) literary history gains by opening the gates
between these worlds when reasoning across the gap between fate and random
chance. By using empirical data, for instance, as a form of “baseline thinking” that
recalibrates our perception of what is novel or unexpected, and which becomes more
relevant as expanding digital archives allow for the construction of baselines at new
scales.108 By recognizing, moreover, that such thinking is not a means to override
indeterminacy, but to explicate it in a more granular way, whether across different
scales of evidence, different bodies of evidence, or in negotiation with the beliefs
and heuristics we bring to our judgments under uncertainty. The point of this
negotiation is not so that we can all arrive at the same place; there will always be
disagreement over the suitability of certain base rates for certain scenarios and, at a
49

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

more fundamental level, everyone arrives at a problem along different paths of prior
belief and knowledge. Nevertheless, to the extent that engaging with probabilistic
reasoning can help delineate and externalize the process that gets us to a particular
judgment, it turns indeterminacy and the unexpected into a matter of open, collective
debate rather than a foregone conclusion. Looking back to Akutagawa scanning
Maruzen’s shelves; or to Katai as he rummaged through bookseller’s catalogs; or to
Yamanoi as he perused the Nikolai Cathedral’s library stacks, such reasoning is a
way to navigate the vast space of historical uncertainty that lies between the total
novelty of a reader’s world and external contexts that threaten to reduce this world
of infinite possibility to a single dimension. A space akin, perhaps, to that separating
the patient in Garshin’s tale, who sees entire worlds unfold in his tiny red flowers,
from the doctors who look on, seeing only a deranged man whose psychosis has led
him to trample wildly through the hospital garden.

References
This essay was originally conceived for the “Novel Worlds” conference held in Montreal, Canada, in the fall of
2018. I want to thank the workshop’s participants for their feedback, as well as the two anonymous reviewers who
commented on the essay in its final stages. The essay also benefitted from conversations with Heekyoung Cho,
Jonathan Zwicker, Paola Iovene, and Shun’ichirō Akikusa. I am especially grateful to Philomena Mazza-Hilway and
Simone Oliver for helping to digitize and clean the bibliographic datasets.
1

2

See Jonathan Zwicker, Practices of the Sentimental Imagination: Melodrama, the Novel, and the Social Imaginary
in Nineteenth-Century Japan (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center, 2006); Edward Mack,
Manufacturing Modern Japanese Literature: Publishing, Prizes, and the Ascription of Literary Value (Durham, NC:
Duke Univeristy Press, 2010); Nathan Shockey, The Typographic Imagination: Reading and Writing in Japan’s Age
of Modern Print Media (New York: Columbia University Press, 2019); Kōno Kensuke, Shomotsu no kindai: media
no bungaku-shi (Chikuma Shobō, 1992); and Nagamine Shigetoshi, Modan toshi no dokushō kūkan (Nihon Editā
Sukūru Shuppanbu, 2001).
Akutagawa Ryūnosuke, “Jidai” (The Age), in Akutagawa Ryūnosuke zenshū, vol. 9 (Iwanami Shoten, 1977-78):
310. All translations are my own unless otherwise noted.
3

4

Seiji Lippit offers one such reading in Topographies of Japanese Modernism (New York: Columbia University
Press, 2002), 51-52.
In particular, see David Damrosch’s work on the anthologization and canonization of world literature in the
context of higher education in What is World Literature? (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003); Gisèle
Sapiro’s work on the role of publishers and translators in shaping the dynamics of transnational literary markets in
“Globalization and Cultural Diversity in the Book Market: The Case of Literary Translations in the US and in
France,” Poetics 38 (2010): 419-439, and “How do Literary Works Cross Borders (or Not)?,” Journal of World
Literature 1, no. 1 (2016): 81-96; and Priya Joshi’s account of libraries as mediating agents in the reception of
English and other literatures in colonial India in In Another Country: Colonialism, Culture, and the English Novel in
India (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002).
5

50

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

B. Venkat Mani, Recoding World Literature: Libraries, Print Culture, and Germany’s Pact with Books (New
York: Fordham University Press, 2017), 9-47.
6

7

Cited in Mani, 150.

8

Mani, 150.

9

Joseph North, Literary Criticism: A Concise Political History (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2017),
1.
10

Rita Felski, The Limits of Critique (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015), 156.

11

Felski, 162.

12

Felski, 170-71.

13

Caroline Levine, Forms: Whole, Rhythm, Hierarchy, Network (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015),
104.
14

Ian Hacking, The Taming of Chance (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 148.

15

Cited in Hacking, 146.

16

Hacking, 215.

17

Eric Hayot makes this point eloquently and extensively in Humanist Reason: A History. An Argument. A Plan
(New York: Columbia University Press, 2021). He shows how the division of the idiographic and the nomothetic in
literary studies, and humanistic reasoning more generally, has its roots in the rise of statistics and other quantitative
disciplines in the nineteenth-century. This epistemological division, which maps onto divisions between event and
law, freedom and necessity, the particular and the general, is lodged at the core of how literary studies sees itself
both as method and ethical stance. Andrew Piper has also written on how scholars in the humanities have resisted
the probabilistic thinking that penetrated other fields of knowledge in the nineteenth century, the legacy of which is
an impoverished language of generalization and a too ideal notion that “generalizing” is not what we do. See Can we
be Wrong? The Problem of Textual Evidence in a Time of Data (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020). If
literary studies as a discipline has tended to shy away from probabilistic thinking, several scholars have written on
how it impacted literature itself. See Rüdiger Campe, The Game of Probability: Literature and Calculation from
Pascal to Kleist (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2012); Maurice Lee, Uncertain Chances: Science,
Skepticism, and Belief in Nineteenth-Century American Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012); and
Adam Grener, Improbability, Chance, and the Nineteenth-Century Realist Novel (Columbus, OH: The Ohio State
University Press, 2020).
Tayama Katai, Tokyo no sanjūnen, 1917 (Kadokawa Shoten, 1955), 160-61. Odd Number refers to a collection of
English translations produced by Jonathan Sturges and published in 1889. Emphasis mine.
18

Katai, 161. The series Katai purchased is likely one published in the 1890s by London’s Mathieson & co. as part
of their “after-dinner series.”
19

James Hadley, “The Beginnings of Literary Translation in Japan: An Overview,” Perspectives 26, no. 4 (July
2018): 568.
20

21

Katai, 160.

Meiji-ki hon’yaku bungaku sōgō nenpyō, in Meiji hon’yaku bungaku zenshū, vol. 52, Kawato Michiaki, et al., eds.
(Ōzorasha, 2001). While the volume contains additional metadata for each title, only the publication year and author
country were collected for this study as it had to be done manually.
22

51

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

23

Meiji・Taishō・Shōwa hon’yaku bungaku mokuroku, ed. Kokuritsu Kokkai Toshokan (Kazama Shobō, 1959).

24

Overall publication numbers are taken from Shuppan nenkan, an annual trade journal that republished government
statistics on publishing trends. The truncated time frame is due to these statistics not beginning until 1881 and going
unrecorded from 1943 to 1949. The Meiji period statistics include newspapers and magazines in the yearly totals,
while only books are included after 1912. Ideally, one should calculate these percentages based on discrete volumes,
and not on individual translations. However, the Diet Library index cannot be aggregated to the volume level
without further manual correction of the digitized data.
25

Jay Rubin, Injurious to Public Morals: Writers and the Meiji State (Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press,
1984), 199-212.
Ōta Saburō, “Hon’yaku bungaku,” in Iwanami kōza nihon bungaku-shi, vol. 14 (Iwanami Shoten, 1959). His
graph, based on records at the Ueno Library and Japan PEN Club, shows a similar decline in translation during the
teens.
26

27

The previously cited work of Joshi and Sapiro are exemplary in this regard. For Japan, see especially work by
Zwicker, Hadley, and Heekyoung Cho, Translation’s Forgotten History: Russian Literature, Japanese Mediation,
and the Formation of Modern Korean Literature (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Asia Center, 2016).
28

Joshi, 28.

29

On the history of probabilistic reasoning, see Hacking; Lorraine Daston, Classical Probability in the
Enlightenment (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1988); Gerd Gigerenzer, et al., eds., The Empire of
Chance: How Probability Changed Science and Everyday Life (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1989). Lee offers a concise summary of this scholarship in Uncertain Chances, 14-27.
30

The scholarship warning against the harms of predictive algorithms for society has grown exponentially in the last
several years. Canonical touchstones include Cathy O’Neil, Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases
Inequality and Threatens Democracy (New York: Crown, 2016); Virginia Eubanks, Automating Inequality: How
High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish the Poor (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2018); and Ruha Benjamin,
Race after Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim Code (Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2019).
31

Hayot, 47.

32

Lee, 9.

33

Barbara Herrnstein Smith, Contingencies of Value: Alternative Perspectives for Critical Theory (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 31-32).
34

Hume believed that any certainty about the world is based on our own experience. Thus the probability of a
miracle is zero as we have no prior experience of it. On Hume’s “Essay on Miracles,” see Empire of Chance, 26-29.
35

Smith, 149. Eric Hayot suggests that such methodological statements, which insist on the singularity of the
aesthetic object and aesthetic experience, are almost always a ruse. Almost no one follows through on such
proposals because to do so would be to reject the idea that aesthetic objects have a social function at all, and would
necessitate matching every object with a singular method. See Humanist Reason, 80-81.
36

Empire of Chance, 29.

37

Daston, 238.

38

Daston, 231.

39

Daston, 238.

52

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

40

Empire of Chance, 30.

41

Daston, 257. Daston draws here on Richard Price’s interpretation of Bayes’s work.

42

Sharon Bertsch McGrayne, The Theory that Would Not Die (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2011), 20.

43

Daston, 273-74.

44

McGrayne, 31-32.

45

Akikusa Shunichirō, “Jutsugo toshite no ‘sekai bungaku’: 1895-2016,” Bungaku 17, no. 5 (September 2016), 10.

46

Mary Hammond, Reading, Publishing, and the Formation of Literary Taste in England, 1880-1914 (Aldershot,
England: Ashgate, 2006), 94.
47

Hammond, 91-92.

The ad, which was unprecedented at the time, was created by series editor Satō Giryō. See Obi Toshito, Shuppan
to shakai (Genki Shobō, 2007), 198-99.
48

Books published in the Everyman’s series are listed in A.J. Hoppé, The Reader’s Guide to Everyman’s Library
(London: Dent, 1960).
49

50

Obi, 198-99.

51

Obi, 195.

52

Hammond, 106-107.

53

This 60% figure was generated by cross-referencing each title with the National Diet Library index.

54

Obi, 201-202.

55

In fact, the scenario I have constructed here violates assumptions that are necessary to calculating an actual
probability, including the assumption of independence of causes and their constancy over time.
56

More technically, a significant p-value means that there is evidence to reject the null hypothesis: that the
coefficients in the linear models fit to each subsample are equal, and thus a model fit to the entire sample would
perform just as well. To determine the p-value, the sum of squared residuals of each of the fitted models (on the
whole sample and the two subsamples) are combined to produce the Chow statistic, which is then compared to a test
statistic from the F distribution based on number of parameters and sample size.
57

This data was collected from a catalog of books selected by the Association. See Nihon toshokan kyōkai sentei
tosho mokuroku, ed. Nihon Tosho Kyōkai (Nihon Tosho Kyōkai Henshūbu, 1918), 90-148. Although the literature
selections were mostly comprised of works by American and European authors, several classical Chinese and
Arabic works were also recommended.
58

Empire of Chance, 35.

59

McGrayne, 31.

60

Daston, 299.

61

Empire of Chance, 41-42. Daston, 294.

62

Hacking, 112, 75-79.

53

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

63

For a complete list of contributing libraries, see http://viaf.org. Detailed descriptions of VIAF and its origins are
available in Anila Angjeli, Andrew Mac Ewan, and Vincent Boulet, “ISNI and VIAF – Transforming Ways of
Trustfully Consolidating Identities” (2014): DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.1350.8640; and Françoise Bourdon and Vincent
Boulet, “VIAF: A Hub for Multilingual Access to Varied Collections” (2011):
http://conference.ifla.org/past/ifla77/79-bourdon-en.pdf.
64

Personal communication with Matt Erlin, September 2020.

65

Because the data does not include reliable information on individual volumes, I could not filter on volume alone.
Nevertheless, the hope is that even for collections of works, selecting just the unique author-translator strings will
cancel out volumes with identical contents.
66

To determine how different a volume-based count would be from the NDL index, I produced a volume-based
count from the Diet Library’s current holdings for all translated volumes by the top 50 authors in the index
(published between 1912 and 1955). How does the index, in other words, compare with the volumes recorded in the
library’s current catalog? This process yielded a ranked list which I compared to the index ranking using a modified
Kendall’s tau statistic, which accounts for ties in the ranking. The two rankings have a correlation of .39 (1 indicates
perfect correlation), suggesting a fairly low correspondence between the title and volume-based counts in terms of
the rank order.
67

The adjustment was made by estimating the overall percentage of non-literary works from three weighted random
samples. Each sample of 100 entries was manually categorized as either literature or not. The mean percent of nonliterary texts across all three samples was 13.6%.
68

The Russian Impact on Japan Literature and Social Thought (1981), 113. They also counted volumes from the
Meiji Period, which come from a section of the Diet Library index that I was unable to digitize for this study.
On Tolstoy’s deep influence on political thought in Japan, see Sho Konishi, Anarchist Modernity: Cooperatism
and Japanese-Russian Intellectual Relations in Modern Japan (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013).
On Tolstoy’s literary influence in both Japan and Korea, see Cho, Translation's Forgotten History.
69

70

The idea of caprice as a more rational response to prediction under uncertainty comes from John Maynard
Keynes’s work on probability, cited in Simon DeDeo, “Bayesian Reasoning for Intelligent People” (August 2018):
https://wiki.santafe.edu/images/2/2e/Bayesian-Reasoning-for-Intelligent-People-DeDeo.pdf, 9.
71

DeDeo provides a lucid explanation of how objective frequencies are incorporate into the Bayesian framework in
“Bayesian Reasoning for Intelligent People,” 2-3.
72

The resurgence of Bayesian statistics in the postwar period was initially fueled by its application in the military
and insurance industry. See McGrayne, Parts II and III. For a history of how statistics came to inform theories of
mind in the 1960s, in part as a result of its broader institutionalization in the social sciences, see Empire of Chance,
ch. 6.
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases,” in Judgment Under
Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, ed. Amos Tversky, et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 3.
The essay was originally published in Science in 1974.
73

On the specific concept of “representativeness,” see Tversky and Kahneman, “On the Psychology of Prediction,”
in Judgment Under Uncertainty, 48-68. The essay originally appeared in Psychological Review in 1973.
74

These heuristics are all fully described in Tversky and Kahneman, “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases.”
75

76

Tversky and Kahneman were also cognizant of the difference between these two ideas of prediction and were
careful not to conflate one with the other. As Persi Diaconis and Brian Skyrms write, the two concluded “that the

54

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

psychological, descriptive theory of choice and the logical, prescriptive theory of choice are two different
enterprises. The prescriptive theory—the logic—is expected utility theory and an adequate descriptive theory must
run a gamut of systematically observable deviations from it. This does not mean that people cannot learn the logic
and implement it in situations where it is important to do so and there is enough time to think carefully.” See Ten
Great Ideas about Chance (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018), 57.
77

Smith, 42.

78

John Guillory, Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1993), 324-25.
79

Guillory, 295.

80

Guillory, 288.

81

Guillory, 299. Emphasis in original.

82

Yamanoi Aitarō, “Garushin no ‘Akai hana’ to watashi,” Rinshō keirin 2, no. 2 (1940), 60.

83

See Peter Henry, A Hamlet of his Time: Vsevolod Garshin: The Man, his Works, and his Milieu (Oxford: Willem
A. Meeuws, 1983), 7-14.
84

Henry, 161-62.

As described in Robert D. Wessling, “Vsevolod Garshin, the Russian Intelligentsia, and Fan Hysteria,” in
Madness and the Mad in Russian Culture, ed., Angela Brintlinger and Ilya Vinitsky (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 2006), 75.
85

86

Henry, 15, 229.

87

Wessling, 76.

88

Yamanoi, 64.

89

As the authors of Empire of Chance write, the question of how people arrive at a base rate suitable to the
prediction task at hand was “rarely considered a topic for research into judgment under uncertainty.” And yet it is
obvious that individuals “must sift information for potentially relevant variables and decide to what variable(s) the
base rate should refer. There is no single correct or mechanical solution to this question; it is a matter of informed
judgment.” See Empire of Chance, 230-231. Emphasis mine.
90

Henry, 341, fn. 53.

91

Henry, 15-16.

92

Henry, 339, fn. 32. See also Rachel May, The Translator in the Text: On Reading Russian Literature in English
(Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press), 20-31.
93

W.M. Garshin, The Signal and Other Stories, trans. Captain Rowland Smith (London: Duckworth & Co., 1912).

94

Garshin, Akai hana, trans. Tanizaki Seiji (Kaigai Bungeisha, 1914). The book was the 8th volume in the Kaigai
bungei sōsho series. This anthology of “overseas literature” was not the first of its kind, as the mass-market
publisher Hakubunkan had earlier published a 12 volume “Modern Western Literature” series. But it is notable for
being a more upscale version of the latter and for its decided preference for Russian authors (Andreyev, Gorky,
Tolstoy, and Garshin). For a description, see Kōno Toshirō, “Taishō-ki no ‘Bungei sōsho’ – ‘Kaigai bungei sōsho’,”
Nihon kosho tsūshin, no. 763 (February 1993), 19-21. It should be noted that this was not Garshin’s first appearance
in Japanese translation. The famous novelist and Russian translator Futabatei Shimei had already translated three of

55

C H A N C E E N C O U N T E R S : W O R L D L I T E R A T U R E B E T W E E N T H E U N E X PE C T E D A N D T H E P R O B A B L E

his stories for the literary magazine Shinshōsetsu and the Tokyo Asahi newspaper between 1904 and 1906. “The Red
Flower” was not among them, but it was through Futabatei’s translations that Japanese writers first came to know of
Garshin. Tanizaki likely came to know of him through his affiliation with the “Waseda Group” (Waseda-ha), a small
coterie linked to Waseda University’s English Department, and which included Hirotsu Kazuo and Kasai Zenzō. As
Heekyoung Cho notes, the department was a crucial intermediary for students wanting to study Russian literature in
the early teens (39-40). Several in the group, including Tanizaki, also belonged to the Kiseki-ha, or Miracle Group, a
literary coterie invested in works depicting psychological anguish and neurosis. See Hoshino Yukihiko, “Garushin
to Kiseki-ha,” Kaishaku 28, no. 10 (1982): 38-41.
The three volumes were Okubyōsha to yokkakan, trans. Kimura Sōgo (Kōnosha, 1920); Garushin zenshū, trans.
Takasaki Tōru, 3 vols. (Shunyōdō, 1933); and Akai hana: hoka yonhen, trans. Jinzai Kiyoshi (Iwanami Bunko,
1937). On the history of Iwanami Bunko pocket paperbacks, see Shockey, ch. 2.
95

The literature primer contained Futabatei Shimei’s translation of “Four Days.” Kindai Nhion bungei dokuhon, ed.
Akutagawa Ryūnosuke, vol. 2 (Kōbunsha, 1925). The short story anthology contained a translation of “The Red
Flower” by Uchiyama Kenji. Sekai tanpen shōsetsu taikei: Roshia hen, vol. 1 (Kindaisha, 1925).
96

97

See the previously cited translations by Tanizaki, Takasaki, and Jinzai. The ad for the Tanizaki translations
appeared in the Tokyo asahi shinbun, February 11, 1914, morning edition, p. 1. On his “fragile and sensitive nature”
as a kind of sacrificial martyrdom, see Yamauchi Keisuke, Roshiya bungaku-shi (Kinseidō, 1927), 191-92.
98

Between 1947 and 1949, a 4 volume set of selected works was published as part of a much larger world literature
series. This was followed in 1950 by a 2 volume collected works. See Garushin senshū, trans. Konuma Fumihiko
(Sekai Bungakusha, 1947-1949) and Garushin zenshū, trans. Nakamura Tōru (Sōgeisha, 1950). The latter was
reissued in 1952 and translations from both would be republished in various formats throughout the early 1950s,
including one version of “The Red Flower” issued as part of an anthology of world literature for young girls and
boys. A critical essay from 1948 is emblematic of the continued symptomatic reading of this story, where it is read
alongside Chekov’s “Ward No. 6” in order to theorize a “literature of the mad.” Ara Masahito, “Kyōjin
bungakuron,” Kosei 1, no. 12 (1948): 10-19.
The essay was partially translated into Japanese in 1934 as “Garushin ni kansuru nōto,” trans. Katō Shinya, Mita
bungaku 9, no. 8 (1934): 86-89. The original Russian title of the essay is O prichinakh upadka i o novykh
techeniyakh sovremennoy literatury (“On the causes of the Decline and on the New Trends in Contemporary
Russian Literature”).
99

These quotes come from Baba Kochō, Kindai bungei no kaibatsu (Kobundō Shoten, 1914), 176; Okubyōsha to
yokkakan, 2; Yamauchi, 191; Garushin zenshū (1933), vol. 3, 3; Akai hana: hoka yonhen, 124; and Akai hana, trans.
Nakamura Tōru (Seibunkaku, 1951), 195.
100

The idea of “provisional stability” comes from Smith, who tries at one point to walk a finer line between
contingency and pattern in delineating the irreducible scrappiness of humans. She argues that the relations among
our actions, knowledge, beliefs, goals, and interests “consist of continuous interactions among various structures,
mechanisms, traces, impulses, and tendencies that are not necessarily...consistent, coordinated, or synchronized...It
must be added, however, that although these interactions obey no ‘rule’ and have no ‘reason,’ they do nevertheless
operate reliably enough under recurrent conditions to permit their more or less coherent description through various
modes of reflexive...analysis and also yield local resolutions and provisional stabilities” (148).
101

102

For an illuminating reflection on new forms of determinism produced by deep-learning algorithms, see Alexander
Campolo and Kate Crawford, “Enchanted Determinism: Power Without Responsibility in Artificial Intelligence,” in
Engaging Science, Technology, and Society 6 (2020): 1-19.
103

Nan Z. Da, “Other People’s Books,” New Literary History 51, no. 3 (Summer, 2020): 475-76.

104

Da, 489, 480-81.
Da, 490.

105

56

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

I draw here on the English translation of “The Red Flower” by Liv Tudge, included in From the Reminisces of
Private Ivanov and other stories (London: Angel Books, 1988), 203.
106

An insightful introduction to the “highly improbable” as philosophical and statistical problem can be found in
Nassim Nicholas Taleb, The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable (New York: Random House Trade
Paperbacks, 2007).
107

108

For a recent example of the power of bibliographic baselines to recalibrate entrenched literary historical beliefs,
see Richard Jean So, Redlining Culture: A Data History of Racial Inequality and Postwar Fiction (New York:
Columbia University Press, 2021). So makes a convincing case for how basic descriptive statistics (e.g., that 97% of
the authors published at Random House between 1950 and 2000 were white) can aid in how we read individual
authors and texts against large-scale structural inequalities. Allen Riddell and Michael Betancourt also make the
case for better bibliographic baselines in their recent “Reassembling the English Novel, 1789-1919,” Journal of
Cultural Analytics (February 3, 2021): https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.19102. They estimate yearly rates of new novel
production across this period in order to aid in sociological understanding of those who pursued careers as novelists.

57

