Journal of
Cultural Analytics

July 21, 2021

The Measure of the Archive: The Ro­
bustness of Network Analysis in Early
Modern Correspondence
Yann C. Ryan and Sebastian E. Ahnert
Yann C. Ryan. Department of English, Queen Mary, University of London, Mile End Road, London E1 4NS, United King­
dom. y.c.y.ryan@qmul.ac.uk.
Sebastian E. Ahnert. Department of Chemical Engineering & Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Philippa Fawcett Drive,
Cambridge CB3 0AS, United Kingdom, and The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB,
United Kingdom.

Peer­Reviewer:Matthew Lincoln, Jessica Otis
Dataverse DOI: 10.7910/DVN/TF3Y0O
Article DOI: 10.22148/001c.25943

ABSTRACT

Network analysis of historical correspondence can be a fruitful way to address historical research questions, and has been
increasingly used in historical studies over the past decade. As with many areas of quantitative humanities research, the
reliability of the results are often called into question, given that such approaches require ’hard data’ as input, yet almost
inevitably use datasets with partial or missing records. Other disciplines using network analysis have conducted robustness
experiments designed to test the impact of data loss or error on their results. In order to test how this missing data might
affect our own area of research, we conducted a number of experiments designed to simulate the impact of the kinds
of loss often seen in historical correspondence data, including random document loss, missing years, and errors in the
disambiguation and de­duplication process. The results show that most network centrality measures maintain robustness
until a very large proportion of the data (60% or more) is removed. Some measures showed a linear change in robustness,
while others remained high and then fell off sharply. Only one, transitivity (local clustering coefficient) was significantly
impacted throughout. We tested a range of data loss scenarios (random single letters, folio books of manuscript letters,
catalogues, and entire years) and a range of commonly­used network metrics. In addition, we tested the robustness of
more complex network analysis results in the literature that combine several network metrics to highlight individuals in
the network, and found that the same types of individuals would have likely been highlighted even with 50% random letter
loss. Alongside the article is a web application, built using Shiny, which will calculate robustness measures for a user­
uploaded network dataset. We conclude that researchers working with similar historical correspondence datasets might
be able to consider network analysis results to be robust in most cases, rather than work on the assumption that missing
data would lead to very different findings or results.

The archives that historians work with are filled with traces of damaged, lost,
and destroyed letters, which, had they survived, might have profoundly changed
established historical narratives. Sometimes these archival gaps are created dur­
ing the lifetime of the individual in question: fleeing persecution in Catholic­run
Bohemia, the theologian, pedagogue and minister Jan Comenius took refuge in
Journal of Cultural Analytics 7 (2021): 57­88

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

Leszno in Poland, where he administered a school and was made the leader of
the Moravian and Bohemian churches. In 1656, during the Swedish invasion
of Poland, Comenius had declared his support for the Swedish side. In retali­
ation, the Polish Catholic partisans burned down Comenius’s town, including
his school. According to John Pell, both Comenius and the town’s inhabitants
had resolved not to remove any goods from the town but rather to weather the
coming storm. This was a mistake, wrote Pell in a letter to Samuel Hartlib: the
army burned Lesna to the ground, along with Comenius’ writings and even the
town’s archives. In the letter he wrote:
They did not fear that he would abandon them as long as his books
and writings were not sent from thence. Thus they have lost both
his manuscripts and their own records &c which might have de­
served an exception from their general resolution of sending noth­
ing out of Lesna.1
This was not the first time Comenius had witnessed the destruction of his records:
he had a similar loss in Fulnek, Moravia, in 1623, not to mention the less vi­
olent loss of documents associated with a life of exile.2 This quotation above
illustrates the contemporary perception of the value of written records, and the
corresponding loss when they were destroyed. What might have been lost in
this invaluable cache of letters, books and documents? It would almost certainly
cause us to revise our understanding of Comenius’s network, and the intellectual
exchange of which he was a part.
In other cases, a correspondence archive is affected by missing data long after
the death of the individual at its centre. Since the death of the Anglo­Prussian
intelligencer Samuel Hartlib in 1660, users and custodians have, according to
Leigh Penman, ‘reorganised, subtracted from, and added to [Hartlib’s] archive,
fundamentally altering its physical and textual make­up.’3 These additions and
subtractions lead to the revision or re­writing of histories, in often substantial
ways. Sometimes the additions are on a smaller scale, such as Noel Malcolm’s
58

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

discovery and publication, in 2001, of six new letters from the French intelli­
gencer Marin Mersenne, but even a single added connection might force us to
re­visit our understanding of an individual’s network.4 In other cases, the data
is partial rather than missing: a piece or group of correspondence data may be
missing the name of a sender or recipient, or have some uncertainty because it
is unknown whether the Julian or Gregorian calendars were used, for example.
Traditional histories are often rewritten or revised in the light of newly­discovered
evidence, but this does not generally hold back existing scholarship: it is rarely
argued that one should avoid a topic because there might exist, in unknown
quantities, some undiscovered part of their archive—a comment which is some­
times levelled at histories written using quantitative methods. We might think
that quantitative measurements, based, as they necessarily are, on seemingly
immovable ‘hard data’, are more at the mercy of missing or uncertain parts of
archives. Is this the case in practice? In this paper we explore these effects
through one such quantitative method: historical network analysis using cor­
respondence data. What effect might events like those above—leading to the
destruction or discovery of letters—have on the quantitative methods and re­
sults we use in our writing of histories today? To what extent—if any—should
we be cautious of conclusions drawn from quantitative results, given that most
archives are partial?

Historical network analysis
Recent years have seen a growth in the use of historical data to construct and
analyse complex networks. These networks are constructed from various his­
torical data. The Six Degrees of Francis Bacon project uses the co­occurrence of
individuals in entries of the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (ODNB)
to create a probabilistic social network of figures between 1500­1700, and em­
ploys degree scores to find influential individuals who do not have their own
separate entry in the source material.5 Ladd (2021) has constructed networks of
those associated with the early modern book trade by looking at co­occurence
59

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

in book dedications.6 In many other studies, historical correspondence has been
used as the basis for network construction.7 Some of the consequential analysis
of these datasets rests on network visualisation, which typically takes the form
of the ‘force­directed’ network diagram. While such diagrams can provide use­
ful insights for smaller networks they quickly become unhelpful ‘hairballs’ as
the size of the network increases. A more quantitative approach is to use a set of
network metrics designed to understand the ‘centrality’ of a given actor within a
network, often with the aim of understanding relationships, roles, or influence.8
These metrics operate across a spectrum of complexities. The simplest is the
degree of a node, which is its number of connections. This metric can high­
light well­connected nodes. There are other more complex metrics which can
be used. Ahnert and Ahnert use betweenness centrality and eigenvector cen­
trality and compare them to the degree, in order to reveal hidden influencers,
who were not necessarily well­connected nodes but who bridged communities
and exerted their influence in other ways.9 Betweenness centrality considers all
shortest paths between two nodes in the network and counts how often a given
node or edge lies on these shortest paths. Eigenvector centrality recursively
scores a node on how well it is connected to well­connected nodes: individuals
which ‘have the ear’ of a powerful person may also exert influence in a network.
In a follow­on project, Ahnert and Ahnert take an additional five key network
measurements to create a ‘profile’ for each individual, which can then be clus­
tered together to find those with similar roles and even predict likely spies or
intelligencers.10
What these studies have in common is that they all, by the nature of their sources,
make inferences based on a partial perspective of the network, which results
from partial or fragmentary data. Critique around the importance of under­
standing partial data in the digital humanities is not new, but there are relatively
few studies which actually seek to ascertain its impact.11 One might think that
network analysis would be particularly sensitive to missing data: for example,
a measurement of a node’s betweenness centrality, which relies on the ability
to measure unbroken paths through a network, could potentially produce very
60

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

different results if a single node in a crucial structural position were removed.
Here we model the removal of archival data in a variety of simulated ways from
three large correspondence datasets, and measure the sensitivity of the results
to this removal. This follows on from work in other areas using complex net­
works, namely archaeology and the social sciences. We find that the patterns in
our datasets broadly align with other disciplines, and suggest that many of the
anxieties surrounding the use of metrics in historical network analysis may be
unfounded.
A common misconception is that the incompleteness of network data is partic­
ularly pertinent in the context of historical data. Network analysis is applied
in a vast range of interdisciplinary settings and data sets, from neuroscience,
ecology, and molecular biology to computer science, physics, and engineering.
Only in very few circumstances is the analysed network complete and accurate.
Most of the time connections are either inferred from noisy data or derived from
a partial snapshot of the system. Nevertheless network analysis has provided
many useful insights into these systems. This is because some results are not
affected by missing data, some are affected but can still be interpreted usefully
in the light of missing data, and lastly, some results in fact tell us more about
the biases and gaps in the data. Our aim in this paper is to establish the extent
to which the results of quantitative network analysis are affected by absent data
in the particular context of historical correspondence networks.

Missing data
Missing network data is a common problem in many other fields. Archaeolo­
gists are often confronted with highly fragmented data, yet the use of network
analysis in their field is established and growing. Leidwanger et al. outlined
some of the pitfalls of network analysis in archaeology, warning that it can lead
to an illusion of objectivity.12 Archaeologists often use objects as proxies for
relationships between nodes: for example two nodes, island communities, say,
might share an edge if the same style of pottery is found in each. This can lead
61

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

to networks based on very partial data, but it has been shown that most metrics
in these networks are robust to node removal.13
Social network data is also often incomplete, because of ‘boundary specifi­
cation’ problems (difficulties in deciding the boundary of a network), non­
response to surveys, or inaccuracy.14 In order to evaluate the effect of this in­
completeness, Galaskiewicz (1991) compared different types of sampling tech­
niques by evaluating their effect on the in­degree of nodes and on ‘popular’
versus ‘unpopular’ actors in the network, and found that some results remained
largely unchanged when data was removed, and that the choice of sampling
technique did not have much of an effect.15 More recently Smith and Moody
measured six metrics across twelve datasets and found that some measurements
were particularly sensitive to missing data, and that large centralised networks
were more robust.16 In a second study, the effect of non­random subsamples
on the network metrics is considered, and it is shown that the removal of more
central nodes has a larger effect in general, again with some dependence on the
particular metric and the network type.17
The advantage of sampling in social network analysis is clear ­ it can reduce
the time or cost of a study by reducing the number or length of interviews,
for example, and as such measuring its impact on results is seen as crucial.
Costenbader and Valente used bootstrap sampling—a method for estimating a
statistic by continually resampling and replacing observations in a dataset—
of survey responses to measure the stability of 11 measurements of centrality
on 59 different networks, and found that although there were variations across
networks, in general in­degree (a count of a node’s incoming connections) and
eigenvector centrality scores were relatively stable even when large portions of
the networks were removed.18
Compared with the humanities and social sciences the natural sciences can
sometimes give an impression that data incompleteness is less of a problem,
due to the control that scientists have over the design and execution of particu­
lar experiments. This is illusory however, specifically in the context of network
62

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

science, which aims to study a wide range of real­world networks, most of which
come in the form of highly incomplete and often unreliable datasets. The ef­
fect of missing data on network metrics has therefore also received attention in
the sciences, and particularly in biology, which often aims to infer networks of
physical interaction between proteins as well as networks of regulatory inter­
actions between genes (among other types of networks). This network data is
highly incomplete, but in many cases also contains spurious links that do not
exist in the living cell. This is because protein­protein networks and gene reg­
ulatory networks are often inferred from circumstantial evidence, rather than
direct measurements. For example, a DNA ‘promoter’ sequence close to a par­
ticular gene may imply that the ‘transcription factor’ protein of another gene
is able to bind to the DNA at this position, representing a regulatory interac­
tion between these two genes, but this binding event may never actually happen
in the cell because the promoter sequence may be physically inaccessible due
to the spatial organisation of the DNA. Because of these kinds of uncertainty,
the edges of biological interaction networks are typically assigned confidence
scores. This poses another problem, namely that such ‘weighted’ networks are
challenging to analyse.
Most network metrics can be generalised to weighted networks, but the weighted
counterparts are often difficult to interpret. As a result weighted networks are
often subjected to a threshold in order to turn them into unweighted networks
that lend themselves more readily to conventional network metrics. The choice
of threshold however is somewhat arbitrary, which is why recent work exam­
ines the consequences of this choice of threshold and the resulting variation
in the amount of missing data in these networks.19 The study finds that some
measures (including degree and PageRank, a form of eigenvector centrality) are
robust and vary little for different thresholds, others (betweenness) are moder­
ately robust, and again others (local clustering coefficient) are highly sensitive.
The authors conclude that a subset of network metrics yields similar results for
a variety of thresholds and recommends the use of these when dealing with this
particular type of biological network data.

63

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

In order to study the effect of missing data on the quantitative analysis of histor­
ical correspondence networks, neither the removal of nodes nor the introduction
of thresholds are the most informative ways to consider incomplete networks.
Node removal is unlikely to be useful, because large correspondence networks
are very likely to contain at least some data for ‘popular’ nodes ­ even if their
own archives have not been digitised or are not available. An example of this
is the archive of John Thurloe, who between 1651 and 1660 was a highly in­
fluential figure in Oliver Cromwell’s government, and Secretary to the Council
of State during the Protectorate. His personal archive has not been added to a
centralised repository, yet because letters by him appear in a number of other
archives, he nevertheless features in other quantitative correspondence network
studies and even ranks highly in some network metrics. Correspondence net­
works are weighted networks if we regard the number of letters sent from one
person to another as a weight of that directed connection. Thresholding may
therefore in principle offer some insight into incomplete networks, but it does
not represent a particularly realistic representation of the kind of data loss found
in historical correspondence archives. In order to model the effect of missing
data in historical correspondence networks, then, the sampling methods we em­
ploy must emulate the varied reasons why particular letters or letter collections
are absent from the historical record.
Networks based on historical correspondence archives have their own patterns
of missing data. Often they contain very large numbers of letters between partic­
ular pairs of individuals. Missing data will either be the result of the inevitable
random loss of individual documents or be of particular events that lead to a
more systematic absence: the missing data may consist of entire folios (the
large volumes into which correspondence is often bound for preservation) that
are missing, or a catalogue of correspondence (here meant as a discrete, self­
contained set of correspondences, often containing all the collected letters of a
single individual) which has not been digitised yet. If large numbers of letters
are destroyed on purpose, this will likely happen in a systematic way. If a person
or an institution archives their correspondence in date order in boxes or folios,

64

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

entire blocks of years might be lost, rather than just a random set of letters. In
other cases, letters or catalogues may be added to the existing archive, which
raises the question of how much we should infer from existing archives, given
that more data may be added in the future.
This paper takes various likely patterns of ‘missingness’ into account, and mod­
els missing nodes, letters, folios, and catalogues. Unlike social network data,
calculating missing historical correspondence data cannot be done by inferring
completeness from the ‘response rate’ of a survey, but rather must work on the
assumption that the correspondence we have is incomplete, and a subset from
a much larger body. In some cases, historical network data has been inferred
using statistical text mining of biographical source material, and is therefore
inherently probabilistic. The project mentioned above, Six Degrees of Francis
Bacon, uses the co­occurence of individuals in ODNB entries to infer relation­
ships between historical actors, and as such is likely to be missing many ties as
well as inferring some relationships that did not in fact exist.
As discussed above, historical network data is at the mercy of collection, archival
and digitisation practices, and as such its ‘missingness’ has a particular struc­
ture. Historical correspondence networks may be incomplete because individ­
ual letters have been lost, because entire folios or even catalogues have not been
digitised, or because whole years of material are absent, having been destroyed
or never been archived as a result of of revolutions, wars, or sieges. Some­
times political disruption is the catalyst for a transfer rather than an absence
in archives. Correspondence held by the Bodleian between 1644—1649, and
forming the Bodleian card catalogue data used here, contains substantial corre­
spondence for the Civil War period which otherwise would have likely ended
up in the State Papers. This paper attempts to reflect the effect of these his­
torical contingencies by simulating the removal of data along these categories
through sampling methods that mirror the different types of absences found in
our data. We find that in large historical correspondence datasets the robustness
of many widely used network measures is high even when large random sam­
ples are removed, and that these results are largely independent of the specific
65

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

type of sampling.

Method
Datasets
We study three large early modern historical correspondence networks, which
rely on three collections that were amassed in very different ways, and for very
different reasons. The first of these, Early Modern Letters Online (EMLO), is a
collection of individual catalogues of correspondence—currently 135 in total—
contributed to EMLO by hundreds of academic scholars over the past twelve
years.20 Most of these are the correspondence of a single individual, with one
major exception, the Bodleian card catalogue (BCC), which we separate out, as
a second dataset. This card catalogue was the product of work by two twentieth­
century employees and one volunteer in the Bodleian and ultimately based on
individual and idiosyncratic acquisitions by the Library over time, resulting in
an ‘ad hoc’ and ‘iterative’ set of metadata.21 EMLO and the BCC span almost
four centuries of European history between 1500 and 1900, but most of the
data in EMLO covers the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, and British and
Dutch diplomatic and intellectual history in particular. Our third dataset is the
State Papers of the Stuart period of British history (1603­1714), derived from the
nineteenth century catalogues (called ‘calendars’) of the collection, which were
digitised by the company Gale. The State Paper Office was established in 1610
with the aim of collecting the English State’s private and working manuscripts
in a single place, and was to become the principal archive and working library
for the parliamentary executive, while essentially being the private papers of
the monarch.22 We might therefore expect this ‘official’ record of the English
State to present a more unified or coherent worldview than EMLO. In fact, the
State Papers are also full of partial or shifting perspectives: individual secre­
taries often viewed their official documents as ‘private’ and kept them as their
possessions on leaving office.

66

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Together, these represent about 320,000 individual pieces of correspondence,
and 60,000 individuals, spread over a timespan of four hundred years (table
1). Both EMLO and SPO have had extensive reconciliation and disambigua­
tion carried out: The Networking Archives project team uses a custom­designed
‘disambiguation engine’ for the State Papers, built as an aid to manual disam­
biguation. With the help of this tool and two years of work by team members,
more than 54,000 name strings have been reduced to 30,000. All letters added to
EMLO are processed through EMLO Recon ­ bespoke software which suggests
matches to existing people records in the dataset.
Despite this work, and the size of the datasets, both EMLO and SPO should be
considered partial. State Papers Online, for example, contains very little from
the State Papers: Foreign series past 1660, and the number of documents for
the years of the English Civil Wars (1642­1651) are minimal, as Charles II left
London and moved the centre of his administration to Oxford and York. In
other cases data is ‘missing’ even though it has survived, because it has not yet
been digitised. The catalogue of Johan de Witt, though one of the largest in
EMLO, is still embryonic and is currently only one­fifth of his total surviving
correspondence. 23 In other cases, such as that of Jan Comenius, mentioned in
the introduction, the majority of an archive has been destroyed and will never
be recovered. The correspondence data may be imbalanced, too: archives, his­
torically, are usually a collection of an individual or family’s incoming letters.
Where large numbers of outgoing letters are found in a catalogue, it is usually
the result of a modern effort to ‘reassemble’ a single individual’s correspon­
dence. A large connected dataset such as EMLO mitigates this imbalance to a
certain extent, as letters sent by one individual may be found in letters received
of another, but it is another source of data ‘loss’ to be noted.
For the purposes of the experiments carried out in this article, as well as on the
Networking Archives project more generally, all three of these datasets were
converted into directed, unweighted networks, with each author/recipient pair
represented as an edge. Letters with multiple authors and recipients were sep­
arated out into multiple edges. Though the archives often contain many mul­
67

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

Table 1: Network Summaries

Letter Records
Nodes
Unique Edges
Diameter*
Avg path length

EMLO

BCC

SPO

100,277
13,333
21,678
15
4.38

54,620
9,747
12,705
18
5.55

174,278
32,269
56,850
13
4.02

Clustering Coefficient 0.00553 0.00519 0.00575
Earliest date
1502
1508
1485
Latest date
1853
1900
1793
*

Global metrics were calculated on an undirected version of each network

tiples of letters between pairs of authors and recipients, the use of unweighted
networks was a deliberate choice: based on the assumption that rankings which
depend on the existence of an edge rather than its strength are less susceptible
to error in the case of missing letters. Though a study of weighted network
robustness would likely be informative, it is outside of the scope of this paper.
Despite their different origins, the datasets exhibit some surprising similarities.
The distribution of the number of connections, or ‘degree distribution’, follows
a similar pattern in all three, which can be described by a power law, indicated
by a straight line when plotted on a double logarithmic scale (figure 1). The
networks are said, then, to be ‘scale free’: meaning that a similar pattern, of a
small number of highly­connected nodes and a large number of nodes with very
few connections, can be observed in any given sub­section of the network. The
implications of scale­free networks have been discussed at length elsewhere,
but this structure is also important for understanding the ways in which different
categories of measures are affected by missing data.24
68

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

BCC

EMLO

SPO

10000

Count

1000
100
10
1
1

10

100

1000

1

10

100

1000

1

10

100

1000

Degree
Figure 1: Degree distribution plot for each of the networks. The downward­sloping diagonal line on a log­log
axis plot is an indication that the networks are scale­free.

Sampling techniques
For each of the three networks, we created subsamples of the network by re­
moving a) letters, b) nodes, c) years, d) folios, and e) entire correspondence
catalogues, reflecting common forms of absences in the historical record, as
discussed above. In addition to this we performed a final experiment, which
simulated another likely source of data error, namely erroneous de­duplication
or disambiguation. In the first five cases we removed a particular portion of
the entity in question, e.g. 10% of letters, or 30% of catalogues, rounding up
where necessary. The samples were produced in 1% steps, from 99% to 1% of
data remaining. In the final experiment the disambiguation and de­duplication
were undone for subsections of the data, in steps of 10% (due to the consider­
able computational cost). As the volume of correspondence for individual years
and in individual folios and catalogues varies considerably we expected larger
fluctuations between samples in these cases than when removing a randomly
selected set of individual letters.
Next, we compared the values of a set of standard metrics (total degree, be­
tweenness centrality, eigenvector centrality, closeness centrality, and transitiv­
ity) in the full network to the equivalent values in the sampled networks for each
node, disregarding any nodes that did not appear in the sample, similar to previ­
69

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

ous approaches in the literature.25 To compare the values we used Spearman’s
rank correlation (referred to ρ hereafter), because rankings are a more useful
way for interpreting network metrics in many contexts, as absolute values may
a) fluctuate due to larger historical developments and changes in archival prac­
tice, and b) are difficult to interpret in the case of betweenness centrality, close­
ness centrality, and eigenvector centrality, because the absolute values for the
highest­ranking nodes can be orders of magnitude larger than the lowest­ranking
for these measurements. In all cases, the relationship between the original and
sample values is monotonic and therefore appropriate for a Spearman’s rank
correlation. We collected 100 independent samples at each 1% interval, from
99% to 1% of the full network, for each category of removed entity (letter, folio,
year, catalogue, and node). This process was repeated 40 times to get a realistic
average value and to measure variability. In other words, we simulated pro­
gressively increasing amounts of missing data, and measured how this affected
quantitative results.

Results
We find that the measures are remarkably robust to many types of data removal,
across all of the networks. The figures 3 to 7 below display some of the key find­
ings, and full results are in summarised form in table 2. In each case we display
the changes in correlation as larger parts of the network are removed as well
as the variability of that change. The former is visualised in the charts below
as a single blue line, representing the mean correlation for each sample (from
99% to 1%) and the latter is measured as the standard deviation of the forty ob­
servations for each sample, visualised as a gray shaded area. In general, most
Spearman correlations remained high (many with a ρ above 0.7) until 50% of
the network was removed. Some metrics and sampling methods showed more
variability than others, which is shown here through the standard deviation: for
example, sampling catalogues resulted in high variance (a standard deviation
of 0.328, where the possible values ranged from ­1 to +1), and to a lesser ex­
tent, sampling years and nodes did too. Most network measures were robust to
70

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

letter removal, and showed very little variability. This may be because of the
particular structure of historical correspondence networks. In general, many
connections between pairs of individuals will be marked by many letters, writ­
ten over a number of years. This means that the most prominent connections in
the network are also the most robust ones with regard to letter removal. Node re­
moval produced similar results, though it resulted in more variation in measures
that are calculated by using the entire network (closeness and eigenvector cen­
tralities). Surprisingly, even removing entire catalogues—essentially removing
at random some of the top­scoring degree nodes—had little effect on the de­
gree of the remaining nodes though it did have a more substantial impact on
closeness and eigenvector centralities. We find that one metric, local cluster­
ing, or transitivity, is consistently sensitive to the removal of any type of data.
This highlights that some research questions will be affected by incompleteness
much more than others. It also underlines how remarkably robust most metrics
actually are: the sensitivity of local clustering is the sensitivity that skeptics of
quantitative analysis might expect to see across the board. We find that it is
the exception that proves the rule, as local clustering demonstrates that some
network metrics may be very sensitive to data removal, but most are not.

Letter Removal
Letter removal had surprisingly little effect on any of our three networks ­ the
correlations stayed high (ρ above 0.6 in all three datasets) even when just 10%
of the total letters remained, and the variation between random samples was
low (figure 2). This is probably because of the aforementioned nature of corre­
spondence data, in which many network edges are marked repeatedly, by many
letters. Removing random letters when there are large numbers of them between
two people makes it very unlikely the corresponding network edge disappears
completely. There were some subtle differences between the metrics, in two
broad patterns: some measurements, chiefly degree and betweenness centrality,
became less correlated in an almost linear fashion as progressively larger parts
of the network were removed, whereas eigenvector centrality showed very lit­

71

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

Table 2: Summary statistics for the removal correlations at fifty and ninety percent removed, showing the mean
Spearman’s rho (ρ) and standard deviation across forty iterations.
Catalogues
Portion removed Mean ρ

SD

Letters
*

Mean ρ

Nodes
SD Mean ρ

Years
SD Mean ρ

SD

Betweenness Centrality†
Betweenness Centrality
Closeness Centrality
Closeness Centrality
In­Degree

50
90
50
90
50

0.772
0.508
0.922
0.669
0.917

0.035
0.067
0.030
0.175
0.017

0.794
0.556
0.943
0.789
0.909

0.009
0.027
0.010
0.038
0.009

0.865
0.568
0.947
0.717
0.965

0.019
0.021
0.022
0.091
0.006

0.792
0.551
0.934
0.716
0.913

0.031
0.042
0.023
0.095
0.016

In­Degree
Out­Degree
Out­Degree
Total Degree
Total Degree

90
50
90
50
90

0.751
0.878
0.630
0.843
0.636

0.059
0.028
0.087
0.030
0.064

0.724
0.881
0.637
0.832
0.650

0.012
0.016
0.046
0.010
0.022

0.845
0.933
0.684
0.903
0.663

0.034
0.011
0.038
0.011
0.033

0.744
0.883
0.638
0.839
0.646

0.032
0.023
0.059
0.023
0.030

Eigenvector Centrality
Eigenvector Centrality
Local Clustering Coefficient
Local Clustering Coefficient

50
90
50
90

0.913
0.639
0.739
0.397

0.071
0.224
0.044
0.126

0.948
0.810
0.734
0.337

0.013
0.054
0.014
0.029

0.934
0.643
0.775
0.298

0.045
0.183
0.044
0.059

0.933
0.706
0.736
0.380

0.033
0.147
0.044
0.068

*
†

Standard deviation
Explanations of this and other standard network terms can be found in a glossary at the end of this article.

tle difference until most of the network was removed, at which point it dropped
substantially. In all cases, the standard deviation was small: the values gener­
ated by each iteration stayed very close to the mean.

Node Removal
We assume that this method of data removal for historical networks is the least
reflective of real­world missing historical data—most of the ‘important’ actors
within the networks are found across a number of archives, and it is unlikely
(though not impossible, in some historical contexts) that an individual would be
systematically erased across all archives, as both a sender and recipient of let­
ters. There is existing literature which looks at the global tolerance of scale­free
networks to both random error and coordinated attack, concluding that networks
are robust to the former but vulnerable to the latter.26 This may partially explain
why when random nodes are removed the individual network metrics are also
resilient. Degree and betweenness sensitivity to node removal are very similar
72

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Betweenness

Degree

Eigenvector

Transitivity

1.0

BCC

0.5

EMLO

ρ (mean)

1.0

0.5

1.0

SPO

0.5

50

100

50

100

50

100

50

100

Percentage Removed (letters)
Figure 2: Robustness of Key Measures to Letter Removal. The blue line indicates the mean Spearman correla­
tion (ρ) mean across all forty iterations. The standard deviation at each sample is represented as a shaded gray
area, however it is usually not visible in this mode of removal because the variation between iterations was so
small.

73

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

Betweenness

Degree

Eigenvector

Transitivity

1.0

BCC

0.5

EMLO

ρ (mean)

1.0

0.5

1.0

SPO

0.5

50

100

50

100

50

100

50

100

Percentage Removed (nodes)
Figure 3: Robustness of Measures to Node Removal. The blue line indicates the mean Spearman correlation
(ρ) across forty iterations. The standard deviation at each sample is represented as a shaded gray area. Gen­
erally, correlations remained high until 70% of the network was removed and then declined sharply. Degree
and betweeness sensitivity were similar to letter removal but closeness (not shown) and eigenvector centralities
displayed more variation.

to the case of letter removal, with subtle differences. Node removal correlations
are very high (ρ above 0.8) until 70% of the network remains, and then decline
more sharply than with letter removal (figure 3). For closeness and eigenvec­
tor centrality, there is much more variation in the sensitivity across each itera­
tion, as increasing portions of the network are removed. This may be because
eigenvector and closeness centrality are more dependent on high­degree nodes,
which are removed in larger numbers in these simulations than when letters are
removed. The variation in eigenvector centrality scores is particularly striking
for the BCC and EMLO networks, but less so for SPO.
74

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Catalogue removal
One of the three archives studied here, EMLO, is divided into individual cata­
logues.27 Each of these catalogues is generally the correspondence of a single
individual, often collected by an individual scholar. Because EMLO is organ­
ised, and new data is added to it, at a catalogue level, removing varying numbers
of these catalogues may provide a realistic simulation of the impact of non­
random missing (or added) data on historical scholarship. A common concern
in historical network research is that a) any historical correspondence record is
inevitably highly incomplete, and b) that many of the records that do survive
have not yet been digitised, or even archived. In addition, the ongoing digi­
tisation efforts mean that any analysed dataset will change over time as more
correspondence is added to the digital archives. The question whether quantita­
tive results obtained with current data will still hold after these future additions
is therefore a further concern. The removal of catalogues can be used to exam­
ine the validity of the above concerns. While the results reveal larger variation
between the independent simulations (due to the broad distribution of catalogue
sizes), all network metrics are remarkably robust up to 50% of removed cata­
logues (ρ above 0.8 in all cases except transivity and betweenness centrality)
and on average not much less robust than for letter or node removal even for
90% of removed catalogues (though in some simulations the correlation plum­
mets for this percentage).

Folio Removal
When we think of missing archival data, perhaps the first image that comes to
mind is missing folios from shelves ­ these folios, as material objects, may go
missing, be borrowed and not returned, be unavailable for digitisation because
of conservation concerns, or destroyed, by accident or deliberately. Two of the
archives here are organised by folio. The Bodleian card catalogue data comes
from just over 500 individual manuscript folios ­ each containing anywhere
from one to five hundred pieces of correspondence and the State Papers are

75

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

Betweenness

Degree

Eigenvector

Transitivity

EMLO

ρ (mean)

1.0

0.5

50

100

50

100

50

100

50

100

Percentage Removed (catalogues)
Figure 4: Robustness of Measures to Catalogue Removal in EMLO dataset. Only EMLO has the catalogue as
an organisational unit and so is displayed separately here. Removing full catalogues still did not have a large
effect on correlations, though more variation between iterations was displayed ­ most likely because catalogue
vary by size. The blue line indicates the mean Spearman correlation (ρ) across all forty iterations. The standard
deviation at each sample is represented as a shaded gray area.

organised similarly. Our algorithm simulates, essentially, walking the shelves
of the archives at random and removing individual manuscript volumes, and
calculates the effect on the resulting network measures.
When removing random samples of folios we find similar results to removing
letters or nodes, with some results that highlights the organisation of the data.
The eigenvector centrality measure of the BCC network shows high variabil­
ity for random folio removal, which mirrors the pattern for node removal and
may suggest that the way in which folios are organised affects the sensitivity of
network measurements to random removal. For example, Bodleian card cata­
logue folios are more likely to contain the correspondence of a single individual,
whereas in the State Papers, correspondence for important individuals is spread
across a number of volumes. Historical network analysis, then, may be particu­
larly sensitive to folio removal when an archive has been arranged by individual
rather than, say, topic or date, though further investigation of this is needed.

Year removal
The three sample datasets, as seen in table 1, span large ranges of dates, some­
times three or four hundred years (though it should be noted that in all cases,
the majority of records are found in a more limited timespan). Intuitively, it
76

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Betweenness

Degree

Eigenvector

Transitivity

1.0

BCC

ρ (mean)

0.5

1.0

SPO

0.5

50

100

50

100

50

100

50

100

Percentage Removed (folios)
Figure 5: Folio Removal results for BCC and SPO datasets. Blue line indicates the mean correlation score
across all forty iterations. The standard deviation at each sample is represented as a shaded gray area. SPO and
BCC include information on the source folio, and we used this as a unit to remove in sampling. Results differed
as a result of the type of material collected in these folios: BCC folios are often person­based, and therefore
show more variability, whereas SPO folios are often archived by subject or chronologically, and seem to display
less variability.

is entirely plausible that longitudinal historical datasets may be missing single
or multiple years of data. EMLO, being a series of curated catalogues, is very
much concentrated in a subset of the years it spans, but even a dataset like the
State Papers has peaks and troughs across time. Diplomats often travelled for
extensive periods of time, resulting in the dispersal of their correspondence.
Joseph Williamson, the Under­secretary of State for the Southern Department
of England between 1660 and 1674, travelled to Cologne to represent the State
at a diplomatic conference for much of 1673 and 1674, and responsibility for
incoming government correspondence passed to a clerk in his office.28 Because
of this, there is little correspondence involving Williamson for these years, and
his dominance of the archive, due to his unprecedented personal effort in main­
taining and archiving his working papers when in Whitehall, is such that this
means there is a substantial dip in the volume of data during these years. In this
case, the ‘missing’ data is in fact dispersed elsewhere and therefore not a part
of the State’s archive, but one can imagine a similar scenario where the mate­
rial could be simply lost. Data for particular years can be missing or relatively
77

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

sparse for other more drastic reasons. During the English Civil Wars from 1642
to 1651, the complications arising from the split in the State’s administration
into parliamentary and royalist factions, compounded by the natural chaos of
war meant that part of it moved its working papers elsewhere, and for these
years again there is a substantial gap in the State Papers correspondence. A
similar profile of variability in the volume of letters per year is also found in the
EMLO dataset. Despite containing records spanning from approximately 1500
to 1800, the database coverage is uneven: two ten­year periods (1634­1644
and 1664­1673) contain 22.5% of the total volume of letters. Because historical
datasets are often longitudinal, ranging over a span of decades or centuries, sub­
stantial gaps in the temporal coverage become more likely and might be thought
to have a great deal of effect on the resulting network. Results for this type of
removed data largely mirror those for letter removal, with more variability for
some metrics (as some years contain much more correspondence than others).

Reconcilation and Disambiguation Errors
Another common source of data error or corruption found in correspondence
archives is that which can be attributed to errors in names. Doing network anal­
ysis from correspondence relies on individuals with the same name being split
where appropriate, and ambiguous or spelling variants being merged in other
cases. One of the datasets used here has been cleaned as part of the project
from which this work arises. In order to test the impact of network analysis
on uncleaned or partially­cleaned data, we used the records of this process to
produce versions of the network where increasing random portions of the data
had been returned to its uncleaned state, and again ran a series of correlations
between the original and sample data network metric ranks. Figure 7 (a) shows
that the differences between the original and sample are broadly comparable to
those found when removing letters: there is little variation between samples,
and in most cases the trajectory is linear.
There is however an interesting difference between in/out degree and total de­
gree scores ­ the robustness of the latter is slightly but noticeably lower (Figure
78

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Betweenness

Degree

Eigenvector

Transitivity

1.0

BCC

0.5

EMLO

ρ (mean)

1.0

0.5

1.0

SPO

0.5

50

100

50

100

50

100

50

100

Percentage Removed (years)
Figure 6: Robustness of Measures to Year Removal. The blue line indicates the mean Spearman correlation
score across all forty iterations. The standard deviation at each sample is represented as a shaded gray area.
The results mirrored those of letter removal, with some more variability due to variations in the amount of
material per year.)

79

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

(a)

betweenness

degree_in

degree_out

degree_total

eigen

transitivity

(b) 1.0
cor

1.0

cor

0.5

1.0

0.5
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

removed
0.5
degree_in

degree_total

metric
0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9

0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9

0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9

degree_out

removed

Figure 7: Robustness results from disambiguation error experiment. To calculate the impact of no or unfinished
data cleaning, we reverted progressively larger samples of the data to its uncleaned state, using the log files
generated by the data cleaning process. Results were similar to other methods of sampling. In (b), a noticeable
difference between in/out degree and total degree robustness can be seen. This is because most of the data
cleaning is merging, and often the secondary name variants are mostly either in or outgoing letters rather than a
balance between the two.

7 (b)). This results from the nature of the uncleaned data and the shape of the
State Papers archive and calendars. Much more of the data cleaning occurred
in the form of merging variant names rather than splitting common names into
multiple. When letters catalogued under a different name are found and merged
a master record, they are often either incoming or outgoing—for example the
master record for William Cecil, 2nd Earl of Salisbury is a mixture of incom­
ing and outgoing letters, but those catalogued under his earlier title, Viscount
Cranborne, are mostly incoming. When letters are merged, in/out degree scores
seem to be affected less than total degree.

Effect on real­world results
How might the results described above impact a real­world analysis of an his­
torical network? To understand the effect these numbers might have on actual
findings, we used the same sampling strategy but looked at its effect on individ­
ual nodes. Two examples are presented here. First, a historical argument that
the project team of Networking Archives are making with the help of this data
rests in part on the specific rankings of three key Secretaries of State: Joseph
80

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

rank_degree

80% Remaining

50% Remaining

20% Remaining

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0

25

50

75 100 0

25

50

75 100 0

25

50

75 100

run
Henry Bennet, Earl of Arlington

Sir Joseph Williamson

Sir Edward Nicholas

Figure 8: To demonstrate the effect of missing data on individual network results, we calculated the degree
ranks of three Secretaries of State at 20, 50 and 80 per cent of the network remaining, run with 100 random
samples. The rankings of all three stayed remarkably similar, only changing significantly when 80% of the
network was removed.

Williamson, Lord Arlington, and Edward Nicholas. Using the same sampling
methods as above, we calculated the ranks for these nodes with 80% and 50% of
the network remaining, 100 separate times. Through this we see that the effect
on basic network measures on some of the highest­ranking nodes was remark­
ably minimal: with 80% of the network removed the rank changes for all three
were at most plus or minus 1 (figure 8).
In order to fully assess robustness we ran an experiment specifically tailored
towards findings using lower­ranking individuals. Ahnert and Ahnert (2019)
compared betweenness centrality and degree to highlight a group of often­overlooked
bridging nodes: those whose importance lay not in their total connections, but
in their capacity to bridge separate parts of the network together.29 In that pa­
per individuals were highlighted by plotting degree and betweenness centrality
ranks and looking for those significantly below the trend line.
Doing this for SPO reveals James Butler, Duke of Ormond as a classic example
of one of these bridges. From an ‘Old English’ family born in London, Butler
bridged several networks both politically and temporally: not only was he a
81

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

Figure 9: Assessing the effect of data loss on a downstream task. James Butler, Earl of Ormond can be de­
scribed as a ‘bridge’ node in State Papers Online: neither his degree or betweenness centrality scores are within
the highest­ranking, but his betweenness centrality is proportionately high in comparison to his degree. This
can be seen from his position well into the lower half in a scatterplot of the rankings of the two measurements in
(a), which plot the rank of his betweenness centrality against his degree, on a log­log plot. In (b), (c) and (d) we
calculated his position with 20%, 50% and 80% of the network removed, respectively. This was done 100 times
and the results plotted one over another, with Ormond highlighted. As can be seen here, he remains roughly in
the same area of the scatterplot, except in some instances when 80% of the network is removed.

connecting link between the English and Irish nobility, he was one of the few
high­ranking politicians with a significant career both before the Civil War and
following the Restoration of Charles II in 1660.30 Thus, despite his relatively
low degree (ranked 226th), his betweenness centrality is proportionately high
(ranked 38th), indicating his value as a ‘bridge’ in the network. This is clearly
seen in the scatterplot below (figure 9).
To estimate the effect of missing data on Ormond’s status as a ‘person of inter­
est’ with this visual method, we again simulated removing 20%, 50% and 80%
of the data, 100 times, and reproduced the scatterplot above for each run. The
result shows that Ormond’s position remains in the same average ‘area’ of the
scatter plot each time, particularly when 20% or 50% of the network is removed.
With 80% of the network removed, Butler’s position as an outlier is consistent
across most of the 100 runs.
82

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Figure 10: Screenshot of Network Robustness Application, made with Shiny

Shiny Application
To help other researchers working with historical correspondence archives to as­
sess the impact of data loss, we have made available a user­friendly implemen­
tation of the code used in this article, which can be used to assess and compare
the robustness of a set of network measures of any network.31 This applica­
tion, developed using R and Shiny, allows a user to upload a simple network
structure—an edge list—and run the same analyses as in this paper, specifying
the number of iterations to run (figure 10). If the edges have further attributes
(for example folio names or other source information) the impact of removing
samples of these attributes on robustness results will also be calculated by the
application.

Conclusions
It is worth noting that the use of historical network analysis is multi­faceted
and it should be stressed that the results that apply to the networks studied
83

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

here—based on correspondence data and with a ‘long tail’ distribution of let­
ters weighted heavily towards a small number of nodes—may not apply to
other sorts of network data such as co­occurence networks. Furthermore, many
historical network studies have used global measurements such as assortivity,
global clustering coefficients and so forth.32 The robustness of these metrics
and network types would require further research. Historical correspondence
network data (as indeed most network data ­ see Introduction) is always incom­
plete: this may be because of gaps in archives, the lack of digitisation, or simply
because most communication is face­to­face and therefore leaves little record.
There is a subset of more mundane ‘knowable’ missing archival data, related
in the first instance to its materiality as well as its editorial and digital after­
lives: the missing data within it is from lost letters, burned books, uncalendared
State papers, undigitised editions, uncrackable ciphers, and so forth which we
can model and understand its impact on findings. Modelling the effect of miss­
ing letters is an enterprise which, as we have shown, can help to deal with the
problem in the absence of reconstructed archives.
The results here show that even with very large numbers of letters missing,
there is suprisingly little effect on the overall network structure—or rankings—
of many key network metrics. The experiments above show that different modes
of removal have different effects, and that missing correspondence data which
affects edges (i.e. missing letters) is more robust than those affecting nodes (such
as missing individuals, folios or catalogues). This should also be taken into
account when considering the impact of their partial data.
In terms of specific metrics, we conclude that researchers using similarly­shaped
datasets for historical network analysis might use caution in the interpretation of
eigenvector centrality or transitivity measures if it is thought that there is signif­
icant relevant data which are yet to be found or digitised, and use another, more
robust measurement instead—particularly if the ‘missingness’ is node­based.
The experiments carried out here show that for historical network analysis on
correspondence networks, the ‘shape’ of the loss has also been shown to have
surprisingly little effect on common real­world downstream tasks. Many of
84

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

the key findings we as authors have relied on using network analysis would
be relatively unchanged even with significant data loss. The rankings of three
key nodes hardly change position in some key network centrality rankings even
with 80% of the network removed. Furthermore, this robustness is not just ap­
plicable to those at the very top of the rankings, either: in a second test, an
outlying though not particularly high­ranking node, James Butler, Duke of Or­
mond maintained his outlier status despite significant data loss as an individual
whose betweenness centrality was proportionately high when plotted against
his degree in the SPO network.
The ‘archival turn’ suggests that we should consider archives as multi­dimensional
textual objects which need to be interpreted rather than neutral silos of docu­
ments to be mined for useful information33 If this is the case, we should bring
our quantitative toolsets and ‘read’ them at scale much like the more traditional
texts which are often the subject of digital humanities. Digital Humanities as a
field has been much concerned with representativeness: Andrew Piper, arguing
that because culture is ‘never finished’, there should be a move away from think­
ing about ‘samples’ and ‘bias’ and towards what he terms representativeness: a
mode which says that every part is a representation, and in which we focus on
the curation of data rather than its quantity (or completeness). We suggest that
an important facet of this data curation is to understand its missingness, and,
moreover, where possible, the effect that this might have on resulting quanti­
tative results, whether they be, as in this case, network metrics, but also more
generally: the same technique might be applied to measures derived from work
in Computational Literary Studies or Spatial Humanities. The robustness of the
arguments that a scholar builds upon such results depends much more on the his­
torical scholarship employed in their interpretation than on the incompleteness
of the underlying data. It follows that historical argument must take archival
absences into account, regardless of whether its foundations are quantitative or
not.

85

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

Notes
1

John Pell to Samuel Hartlib. Zürich, 27 July 1656. BL Add MS 4280, 37r­v. Digital version of printed
transcription consulted, in Jana Amosa Komenského korrespondence. Ed. Adolf Patera. Prague: 1892. No. 159.
Found in Early Modern Letters Online [http://tinyurl.com/yaumwclk]
2

Vladimír Urbánek, “Comenius, the Unity of Brethren, and Correspondence Networks,” Journal of Moravian
History 14, no. 1 (2014): p. 31.
3

Leigh T. I. Penman, “Omnium Exposita Rapinæ: The Afterlives of the Papers of Samuel Hartlib” [in en], Book
History 19, no. 1 (2016): p. 4. https://doi.org/10.1353/bh.2016.0000.
4

Noel Malcolm, “Six Unknown Letters from Mersenne to Vegelin,” The Seventeenth Century 16, no. 1 (2001):
p. 95. https://doi.org/10.1080/0268117X.2001.10555485.
5

Christopher N. Warren et al., “Six Degrees of Francis Bacon: A Statistical Method for Reconstructing Large
Historical Social Networks,” Digital Humanities Quarterly 010, no. 3 (2016).
6

John R. Ladd, “Imaginative Networks: Tracing Connections Among Early Modern Book Dedications,” Jour­
nal of Cultural Analytics, March 30, 2021, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.21993.
7

For example see Ruth Ahnert and Sebastian E. Ahnert, “Protestant Letter Networks in the Reign of Mary I:
A Quantitative Approach” [in en], ELH 82, no. 1 (2015): 1–34, https://doi.org/10.1353/elh.2015.0000; Ruth
Ahnert and Sebastian E Ahnert, “Metadata, Surveillance and the Tudor State” [in en], History Workshop Journal
87 (April 2019): 27–51, https://doi.org/10.1093/hwj/dby033; Evan Bourke, “Female Involvement, Membership,
and Centrality: A Social Network Analysis of the Hartlib Circle” [in en], Literature Compass 14, no. 4 (2017),
https://doi.org/10.1111/lic3.12388.
8

See Linton C Freeman, Douglas Roeder, and Robert R Mulholland, “Centrality in social networks: ii. experi­
mental results” [in en], Social Networks 2, no. 2 (1979): 119–41, https://doi.org/10.1016/0378­8733(79)90002­9;
Phillip Bonacich, “Factoring and weighting approaches to status scores and clique identification” [in en], The
Journal of Mathematical Sociology 2, no. 1 (1972): 113–20, https://doi.org/10.1080/0022250X.1972.9989806;
Phillip Bonacich, “Power and Centrality: A Family of Measures,” American Journal of Sociology 92, no. 5 (1987):
1170–82, https://doi.org/10.1086/228631; John Scott, “Social Network Analysis” [in en], Sociology 22, no. 1
(1988): 109–27, https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038588022001007; Stanley Wasserman and Katherine Faust, So­
cial Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, 1st ed. (Cambridge University Press, November 1994), https:
//doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511815478.
9

Ahnert and Ahnert, “Protestant Letter Networks in the Reign of Mary I.”

10

Ahnert and Ahnert, “Metadata, Surveillance and the Tudor State,” p. 42.

11

Katherine Bode, “The Equivalence of “Close” and “Distant” Reading; or, Toward a New Object for Data­Rich
Literary History” [in en], Modern Language Quarterly 78, no. 1 (2017): for caution, https://doi.org/10.1215/00
267929­3699787; exceptions are Matthew Lincoln and Sandra Van Ginhoven, “Modeling a Fragmented Archive:

86

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

A Missing Data Case Study from Provenance Research,” 2020, which both use imputation to model the effect
of missing data, https://doi.org/10.1184/R1/12363059.V1; Koenraad Brosens et al., “Slow Digital Art History
in Action: Project Cornelia’s Computational Approach to Seventeenth­century Flemish Creative Communities,”
Visual Resources 35, nos. 1­2 (2019): 105–24, https://doi.org/10.1080/01973762.2019.1553444.
12

Justin Leidwanger et al., “A manifesto for the study of ancient Mediterranean maritime networks” [in en],
Antiquity Project Gallery 88, no. 342 (2014).
13

Matthew Peeples, “Network science and statistical techniques for dealing with uncertainties in archaeological
datasets,” accessed September 16, 2020, http://www.mattpeeples.net/netstats.html.
14

Gueorgi Kossinets, “Effects of missing data in social networks” [in en], Social Networks 28, no. 3 (2006): 247–
68, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2005.07.002; Edward Laumann, Peter Marsden, and David Prensky, “The
Boundary Specification Problem in Network Analysis,” Applied Network Analysis: A Methodological Introduction
61 (January 1983).
15

Joseph Galaskiewicz, “Estimating point centrality using different network sampling techniques” [in en], Social
Networks 13, no. 4 (1991): 347–86, https://doi.org/10.1016/0378­8733(91)90002­B.
16

Jeffrey A. Smith and James Moody, “Structural effects of network sampling coverage I: Nodes missing at
random” [in en], Social Networks 35, no. 4 (2013): 652–68, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2013.09.003.
17

Jeffrey A. Smith, James Moody, and Jonathan H. Morgan, “Network sampling coverage II: The effect of
non­random missing data on network measurement” [in en], Social Networks 48 (January 2017): 78–99, https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2016.04.005.
18

Elizabeth Costenbader and Thomas W Valente, “The stability of centrality measures when networks are sam­
pled” [in en], Social Networks 25, no. 4 (2003): p. 306, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378­8733(03)00012­1.
19

Lyuba V. Bozhilova et al., “Measuring rank robustness in scored protein interaction networks” [in en], BMC
Bioinformatics 20, no. 1 (2019): 446, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859­019­3036­6.
20

See http://emlo­portal.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/collections/?page_id=2259 for a full list of contributors and http://
emlo­portal.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/collections/?page_id=1966 for the current list of EMLO catalogues.
21

Miranda Lewis, “Ghosts in the Machine: (Re)Constructing the Bodleian’s Index of Literary Correspondence,
1927­1963.,” 2013, http://www.culturesofknowledge.org/?p=295.
22

For accounts of the organisation of the State Paper Office see Arnold Hunt, “The Early Modern Secretary and
the Early Modern Archive” (British Academy, April 26, 2018), https://doi.org/10.5871/bacad/9780197266250.
003.0005.
23

see http://emlo­portal.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/collections/?catalogue=johan­de­witt

24

See Albert­László Barabási and Réka Albert, “Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks,” Science 286, no.
5439 (1999): for foundational discussion of scale­free networks. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.286.5439.509;
Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz, “Collective dynamics of ‘small­world’networks,” Nature 393, no. 6684

87

T H E M E A S U R E O F T H E A R C H I V E : T H E R O B U S T N E S S O F N E T W O R K A N A LY S I S I N E A R LY
MODERN CORRESPONDENCE

(1998): 440–42, https://doi.org/10.1038/30918.
25

Galaskiewicz, “Estimating point centrality using different network sampling techniques”; Costenbader and
Valente, “The stability of centrality measures when networks are sampled”; Stephen P. Borgatti, Kathleen M.
Carley, and David Krackhardt, “On the robustness of centrality measures under conditions of imperfect data” [in
en], Social Networks 28, no. 2 (2006): 124–36, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2005.05.001; Smith, Moody, and
Morgan, “Network sampling coverage II”; Peeples, “Network science and statistical techniques for dealing with
uncertainties in archaeological datasets.”
26

See Réka Albert, Hawoong Jeong, and Albert­László Barabási, “Error and attack tolerance of complex net­
works” [in en], Nature 406, no. 6794 (2000): 378–82, https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 35019019; Petter Holme et
al., “Attack vulnerability of complex networks,” Phys. Rev. E 65 (5 2002): 056109, https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1103 /
PhysRevE.65.056109; H. Jeong et al., “Lethality and centrality in protein networks” [in en], Nature 411, no. 6833
(2001): 41–42, https://doi.org/10.1038/35075138.
27

The EMLO catalogues are modern subsets, based on reassembled letters of a single individual (often ultimately
from on a printed edition but not in all cases). On the other hand, the mass of SPO data has been reorganised over
time, now mostly into ‘series’ and ‘classes’, based on either geography or periods of rule rather than individuals.
There are a small number of additional individual­based collections, such as the Cecil Papers, which would be
broadly comparable to an EMLO catalogue, but most of the records are not organised in this way.
28

See Alan Marshall, “Sir Joseph Williamson and the Conduct of Administration in Restoration England,” His­
torical Research 69, no. 168 (1996): p. 34, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468­ 2281.1996.tb01840.x; These letters
have been published in W. D. Christie and Camden Society (Great Britain), Letters Addressed from London to Sir
Joseph Williamson While Plenipotentiary at the Congress of Cologne in the Years 1673 and 1674, v. 1 (Camden
Society, 1874).
29

Ahnert and Ahnert, “Metadata, Surveillance and the Tudor State,” pp. 35­38.

30

Toby Barnard, “Butler, James, First Duke of Ormond (1610–1688), Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,” Oxford Dic­
tionary of National Biography, January 2008, https://doi.org/10.1093/ref:odnb/4191.
31

A version of the application with some usage limits is available at https://networkingarchives.shinyapps.io/
network_robustness_tool/. The source code is included in the code repository alongside this article.
32

For example Matthew Lincoln, “Continuity and Disruption in European Networks of Print Production, 1550­
1750,” Artl@s Bulletin 6, no. 3 (2017); Martin Grandjean, “Les réseaux de la coopération intellectuelle. La Société
des Nations comme actrice des échanges scientifiques et culturels dans l’entre­deux­guerres” [in fr] (PhD diss.,
Université de Lausanne, June 2018).
33

See Alexandra Walsham, Kate Peters, and Liesbeth Corens, “Introduction: Archives and Information in the
Early Modern World” (British Academy, April 26, 2018), https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5871 / bacad / 9780197266250 .
003.0001; Eric Ketelaar, “Tacit narratives: The meanings of archives,” Archival Science 1, no. 2 (2001): 131–41,
https://doi.org/10.1007/bf02435644.

88

