Journal of
Cultural Analytics

December 15, 2021

On the Theory of Narrative Levels and
Their Annotation in the Digital Context
Nora Ketschik, Benjamin Krautter, Sandra Murr, Yvonne Zimmermann
Nora Ketschik, University of Stuttgart
Benjamin Krautter, University of Cologne
Sandra Murr, German Literature Archive Marbach
Yvonne Zimmermann, University of Stuttgart
Peer-Reviewer: J. Berenike Herrmann
Dataverse DOI: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/2YQVM6
Article DOI: https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.30700

ABSTRACT
The article was written in the context of a Shared Task on the Analysis of Narrative levels Through Annotation (“SANTA”)
which was published as a first draft in 2019. This revised version is based on further discussion on the formalization of the
narratological concept of ‘narrative level.’ We firstly discuss the theory of narrative levels in literary studies, secondly derive
features for the identification of narrative levels and finally develop guidelines for their annotation. An essential finding of the
theoretical work lies in connecting the concept of ‘narrative level’ to the narrator. By identifying different types of narrators, we
are able to enumerate and categorize different scenarios for the emergence of new levels in narrative texts. Hereby, the article
does not remain restricted to prototypical cases, but also deals with rare and problematic cases. Overall, our goal is to provide
a theoretical reflection on narrative levels and to create accurate guidelines for its recognition. The method of approaching the
phenomenon through annotation has proven to be extremely fruitful particularly in identifying the boundaries of the narrative
levels.

Preliminary Remarks
Since our participation in the Shared Task on the Analysis of Narrative Levels
Through Annotation we have reflected on several terms and concepts. More than
ever, we are convinced that the significance of the narrator and his act of mediation
is the key to an adequate description of narrative levels. We not only strengthened
the position of the narrator in our guidelines, we also decided not to overemphasize
the annotation of concepts like focalization, the narratee or other phenomena such
as forms of imagination or dreams. Nevertheless, we delimited the narrative levels
Journal of Cultural Analytics 12 (2021): 69-97

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

from those phenomena for a better understanding. In addition, we restructured the
guidelines to achieve a clearer distinction between our theoretical conception, the
identification of new narrative levels and the application of the annotation guidelines. Key examples were added to enhance the understanding of our theoretical
approach.
In general, our primary goal is to formalize and refine the concept of narrative
levels rather than to simplify the complex phenomenon in order to achieve a high
annotation agreement.

Theoretical Introduction and Use Cases
Narrative theory – or Narratology – has been one of the central concerns of international literary studies since the early nineteen-sixties.1 Narratology deals “with the
general theory and practice of narrative”2 and focuses on a systematic description
of different types, structures and functionalities of narrative phenomena. While its
concepts are often used as heuristic instruments for text analysis, narratologists are
still debating whether narratology is a method, a theory or a discipline.3 The analyzed phenomena range from different characteristics of narrators – their relation
to the fictional world, their focalization (or point of view) within this world, their
representation and their reliability – to structural elements such as narrative levels
or chronological aspects, only to name a few. More generally speaking, the narrative’s order, its duration, the frequency of storytelling or the narrating voice can
be of interest for a narrative text analysis. Subsequently, a fundamental interest of
narratologists lies in the organization and structure of the literary plot. To describe
both, the sequence of events in time and their integration into an organized plot,
Gérard Genette developed a systematic terminology using the terms discours and
histoire4 to distinguish between what is narrated and how it is narrated. While histoire subsumes the “totality of the narrated events,”5 the “discours du récit” is the

70

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

actual realization of the histoire in the narration, be it oral or written.
For the distinction of narrative levels, Genette proposes a classification of the narrator as extradiegetic, intradiegetic and metadiegetic. The extradiegetic narrator
produces a “first narrative with its diegesis.”6 He is potentially followed by an
intradiegetic narrator, oftentimes a character that appears in the first narrative,
who goes on to produce a second narrative, and so on. It is common to formalize
and describe the structure of these different narrative levels in metaphorical terms,
e.g., the metaphor of framing and embedding, the so-called Chinese boxes or the
metaphor of a stack of trays.7
Our guidelines follow the basic idea of Genette that a new narrative level needs a
sufficiently marked “threshold between one diegesis and another.”8 To obtain this
threshold, Genette ties a new narrative level to a new narrator. Paradigmatically, a
new narrative level crosses both illocutionary and ontological boundaries, meaning
that in most cases, a new speaker within the fictional world of the diegesis tells
a story that is located in a new world with, e.g., a new set of characters, a new
location and/or a change of time.9 In telling that story, the speaker becomes a new
intradiegetic narrator and thus, the narrator and the narrative level change. “One
Thousand and One Nights” (“Arabian Nights”), a collection of Middle Eastern folk
tales is often referred to as a striking example for this type of change in narrator.
We would like to expand on this concept as, according to our understanding, literature has produced examples that show clear signs of creating new narrative
levels without having a prototypical exchange of narrator.10 Still, new narrative
levels need to have clearly distinguishable diegeses and are therefore distinct from
anachronisms. For instance, the crossing of illocutionary boundaries, i.e., speech
acts that introduce a new speaker,11 might be an indicator, but is in our understanding not a sufficient argument for a new narrator and subsequently a change
of narrative levels on its own. To induce a level change, the newly introduced

71

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

speaker would actually have to narrate a story which is not the standard case for
direct character speech.
The annotation of narrative levels is a fundamental step towards understanding and
interpreting a narrated literary text. In general, we assume that it is necessary to
analyze the structure and the form of the text to gain insight into the interrelation
between form and content (e.g., Emil Staiger’s “Gehalt-Gestalt-Gefüge”). Narrative levels are furthermore of great relevance, as they reveal the construction of the
text, the type of narrator and the content.
Possible research questions based on identifying narrative levels can focus on
structural elements of a text, e.g., an overview of the different narrators and the stories they tell, the relationship between frame and embedded stories, or the importance of a narrative level based on its length. Research questions can also address
the content of narrative levels. Since narrative levels can be functionally related
to each other, it is important to interpret the character’s or the narrator’s distribution of information with such interdependencies in mind. Different functions of
narrative levels are possible, e.g., the embedded story provides an explanation for
elements of the frame story (explicative), the embedded story is constitutive for
the frame story (actional) or the embedded story is thematically related in the form
of analogies, correspondences, contrasts or relationships to the frame story (thematic).12 Furthermore, a more systematic analysis of crossovers reaching from one
narrative level to another seems to be a productive goal that requires the identification of narrative levels as fundamental. With the bigger picture of literary history
in mind, it would also be instructive to see if there are certain patterns that emerge
with regard to literary genres, literary periods, the author’s gender or age for the
number, length and function of narrative levels within a literary text.

72

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Terminology & Concepts
In order to clarify the terminology that we use in our Premises: How to find narrative levels and the Annotation Guidelines, certain basic narratological terms are
explained here in a concise way. This should help achieve a better understanding
of our guidelines and the underlying literary concepts used in it.

Narrative
Although narrativity as a term has become contested, two distinct concepts are
still commonly used in the study of literature:13 While in an earlier tradition –
described as classical narrative theory – narrativity “was bound to the presence of
a mediating authority, the narrator,” structuralism focused on “temporal structure
and [. . . ] change of state.” We agree with Wolf Schmid that in “practical literary
theory,” narrativity is best explained through a combination of both concepts.14
The narrative is thus linked to a speech act in terms of communication theory and it
is mediated. This means that the narrator is telling the story to a narratee, whether
it is explicitly mentioned or not. Our minimal definition of a narrative (story15 )
would be that an action evokes a change of state – from state A to state B –, that
the change of state is motivated and causally linked and that it is mediated by a
narrator.16

Narrator
The narrator is one of the central analytical concepts of narratology.17,18 With regard to the distinction of different narrators and consequently the change of a narrator in a single text, it is useful to determine his position in relation to the story he
tells. In principle, it must be determined whether the narrator is part of the diegetic
world or not.19

73

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

Homodiegetic narrator

A homodiegetic narrator participates as a character in the story he tells. He is
part of his own story, be it as silent observer, side character or even one of the
main characters.20 Thus, a homodiegetic narrator’s “I”/self is split in a narrating
and an experiencing “I”/self. On the one hand, the narrating “I”/self is located in
the exegesis or on the superordinate level of the current narrative level and has
an overview of the entire course of events. On the other hand, the experiencing
“I”/self is located on the current narrative level as one character among others
and its perspective depends on the experience just made.21 Normally, there is a
clear distinction between the narrating “I”/self and the experiencing “I”/self, e.g.,
regarding the time the story was experienced and the time the story is narrated.
In certain cases, however, the distance between the experiencing and the narrating
“I”/self is seemingly removed.22
Heterodiegetic narrator

In contrast to a homodiegetic narrator, a heterodiegetic narrator is not part of the
story he tells. In a story that is narrated by a heterodiegetic narrator, there is a
clear distinction between the position of the narrator (exegesis) and the world of
the characters (diegesis). As a heterodiegetic narrator is not part of the story he
tells, there is no experiencing “I”/self present in the story.

Narrative levels
The terminology used to describe narrative levels is diverse and varies widely.23
Our basic approach is to define any new story that occurs within a given narrative
text as a new narrative level. A new story goes hand in hand with a change of the
narrator. In most cases, this change is clearly visible, but there are also types of
changes in narrator that are subtle and more difficult to trace (see Cases of narrator
changes for a more detailed explanation).
74

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Narrative levels can be interlaced (see Figure 1:1, 2, 3, 4) or arranged sequentially
Figure 1:2a, 2b, 2c), or be a combination of both. Within the frame story (superordinate level), several embedded stories with a different degree can occur. As an
embedded story can become the frame story for another embedded story, we use
the terms first-, second-, third-, etc. degree narrative as an alternative to Genette’s
terminology in order to avoid ambiguities.24 When narrative levels are arranged
sequentially, they are located next to each other on the same narrative level. Sequentially arranged levels are usually embedded as second-, third-, etc. degree
narrative. In rare cases, the first-degree narrative is itself arranged sequentially
(cf. Orhan Pamuk: “My Name Is Red”).

Figure 1: Interlaced and sequential arrangement of narrative levels within a literary text.

75

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

Exegesis and diegesis
Since the “diegesis designates the level of the narrated world, and exegesis the level
of the narrating,”25 a homodiegetic narrator (of a first-degree narrative) belongs to
both levels: In his function as narrator, he belongs to the exegesis, but since he
tells a story with himself as a character in it, he is also part of the diegesis.26 A
heterodiegetic narrator, however, only belongs to the exegesis; he is not part of the
narrated world (diegesis).
The location of the narrator (exegesis) in a first-degree narrative is not an independent narrative level. Aphorisms, mottos, comments, judgments, forms of address
(fictitious recipient) and thoughts expressed by the narrator27 do not form a new
narrative level. They are part of the instantaneous narrative level. This is also true
for expressions of narrators in a second-, third-, … degree narrative, as long as they
do not address an element of the superordinate level (see Interruption of narrative
levels). Nevertheless, we believe it is still possible to annotate such expressions
(for further details see Non-Narrative Passages).

Illocutionary and ontological boundaries
Discussing narrative levels, Marie-Laure Ryan proposed to focus on narrative boundaries. She distinguished between illocutionary and ontological boundaries and,
according to her, both can be crossed actually as well as virtually.28,29 In our understanding, neither a change of the speaker (illocutionary boundary), nor the presentation of the speech act through the narrator is sufficient for a change of the
narrative level. First of all, speech acts can only in clearly defined circumstances
(see New narrative level through new story and Cases of narrator changes) lead
to a change of the narrator and, thus, a change of narrative levels. Ontological
boundaries only lead to a new narrative level, when a change of the narrator occurs. Therefore, Harry Potter trespassing the worlds at King’s Cross Station is, in

76

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

our view, not introducing a new narrative level.

Premises: How to find narrative levels
The goal of the following premises is to find all narrative levels in a given narrative
text. Our basic assumption is that each text has at least one narrative level.

New narrative level through new story
A new story within a narrative text calls for a new narrative level and is triggered
by a change of the narrator. We use the terminology ‘change’ in a broad sense
that includes, for instance, a change of the narrator’s function and a change of his
position in relation to the story he tells (see Narrator). A story is defined by the
following criteria:
1. A story is a self-contained action whose events and happenings are causally
linked and cause a change of state. Accordingly, headlines are usually not
part of the narrated world.
2. Stories are mediated by the narrator and presented as “the oral or written
discourse that undertakes to tell of an event or a series of events.”30
3. Stories are mostly narrated in past tense. Rather rare exceptions are novels such as Christian Kracht’s “Faserland” (homodiegetic narrator, present
tense).

Cases of narrator changes
A change of the narrator results in a new story and therefore in a change of the
narrative level. The complexity of literary texts, however, forces us to widen the
concept of the changing narrator that Genette uses to distinguish between narrative
77

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

levels. In the following, we define the exact scenarios that make use of a changing
narrator and thus result in a new narrative level. The scenarios explain in detail
what is needed for a change of narrative levels.
The prototypical case: a new narrator as a character of the fictional world

Typically, the change of the narrator results in a new narrator – oftentimes a character of the fictional world – that goes on to tell a (or his own) story. The new
narrator is part of the diegesis that is told by a superordinate narrator. In a new
story that changes its narrator in this way, there is a new narrating “I”/self.
This is the scheme that Gérard Genette outlines to illustrate his understanding of
narrative levels.31 In his example, Antoine-François Prévost’s novel “Histoire du
Chevalier Des Grieux et de Manon Lescaut,” a prototypical change of the narrator
becomes visible. The novel starts with the memoirs of Monsieur de Renoncour.
He is the first-degree narrator and thus, as he tells his memoirs, he is part of his
own story (homodiegetic). This is the beginning of the novel:
Just about six months before my departure for Spain, I first met the Chevalier des
Grieux. Though I rarely quitted my retreat, still the interest I felt in my child’s welfare induced me occasionally to undertake short journeys, which, however, I took
good care to abridge as much as possible. (Antoine-François Prévost: “Histoire de
Chevalier Des Grieux et de Manon Lescaut”)

De Renoncour’s description of how he first met des Grieux – narrated as an analepsis (flashback) – goes on for a few pages. Following that, two years of narrated
time are skipped. One day, de Renoncour and des Grieux both meet again in Calais,
where des Grieux goes on to tell about his recent voyage to America, his misfortunes and his failures. De Renoncour introduces the story as follows:

78

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

“I was seventeen years old, and was finishing my studies at Amiens, whither my
parents, who belonged to one of the first families in Picardy, had sent me. I led a life
so studious and well regulated, that my masters pointed to me as a model of conduct
for the other scholars. Not that I made any extraordinary efforts to acquire this
reputation, but my disposition was naturally tractable and tranquil; my inclinations
led me to apply to study; and even the natural dislike I felt for vice was placed to
my credit as positive proof of virtue. The successful progress of my studies, my
birth, and some external advantages of person, made me a general favourite with
the inhabitants of the town [. . . ].”I should here inform the reader that I wrote down
the story almost immediately after hearing it; and he may, therefore, be assured of
the correctness and fidelity of the narrative. I use the word fidelity with reference to
the substance of reflections and sentiments, which the young man conveyed in the
most graceful language. Here, then, is his story, which in its progress I shall not
encumber with a single observation that was not his own.
“I was seventeen years old, and was finishing my studies at Amiens, whither my
parents, who belonged to one of the first families in Picardy, had sent me. I led a life
so studious and well regulated, that my masters pointed to me as a model of conduct
for the other scholars. Not that I made any extraordinary efforts to acquire this
reputation, but my disposition was naturally tractable and tranquil; my inclinations
led me to apply to study; and even the natural dislike I felt for vice was placed
to my credit as positive proof of virtue. The successful progress of my studies, my
birth, and some external advantages of person, made me a general favourite with
the inhabitants of the town [. . . ].”

As a character of the first-degree narrative within his speech act des Grieux becomes the intradiegetic narrator of a second-degree narrative, where he himself is
one of the protagonists: there is a new narrating “I”/self. The direct speech clearly
indicates a changing speaker and thus, an illocutionary boundary that is actually
crossed. This, however, is not the reason for the change of the narrative level.
In telling his story (with self-contained actions whose events and happenings are
causally linked and cause a change of state) des Grieux is not only the new speaker
(crossing of illocutionary boundary), but the new narrator. His story also crosses
ontological boundaries: the voyage to America describes a world distinct to the
79

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

world of Monsieur de Renoncour.
Throughout literary history similarly structured texts are quite common. Heinrich
von Kleist’s “Improbable Veracities” is one of the many examples that could be
cited. In Kleist’s short story, though, the first-degree narrator is heterodiegetic,
i.e., he is not part of the story he narrates. The story starts like this:

The company in return promised him their belief in advance: they simply exhorted
him to speak and listened. “On a march in the Rhine campaign,” began the officer,
“I noticed, after a battle we had had with the enemy, a soldier who walked erect, with
gun and pack, in rank and file, although he had a shot through the middle of his chest:
at least one saw the hole in front of the strap of his ammunition pocket, where the
bullet had entered, and another in back, in his jacket, where it had left [. . . ].”“Three
stories,” said an old officer at a gathering, “are of the type that, although I myself
completely believe them, were I to tell them, I would run the risk, nevertheless, of
being taken for a windbag. For people demand of truth, as its primary requirement,
that it be probable. And yet probability, as experience teaches us, is not always on
the side of truth.” Tell them, called several members of the gathering, tell them!–for
the officer was known as a bright and esteemed man who was never guilty of lies.
The officer said laughing that he wanted to oblige the company, but he explained
once again beforehand that, in this particular case, he made no claim for their belief.
The company in return promised him their belief in advance: they simply exhorted
him to speak and listened. “On a march in the Rhine campaign,” began the officer,
“I noticed, after a battle we had had with the enemy, a soldier who walked erect,
with gun and pack, in rank and file, although he had a shot through the middle of
his chest: at least one saw the hole in front of the strap of his ammunition pocket,
where the bullet had entered, and another in back, in his jacket, where it had left
[. . . ].” (Heinrich von Kleist: “Improbable Veracities”)

The change of the narrator is clearly noticeable as soon as the officer talks about
“‘a march in the Rhine campaign’.” In this passage, he starts to tell a story based
on his own experiences. Apart from the verbum dicendi “began the officer,” from
80

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

then on, the officer is the new narrator and becomes the new, now homodiegetic,
narrating “I”/self.
A change of the narrator’s position in relation to the story he tells

While a change of the narrative level that introduces a new narrator might be the
standard case for embedded stories, literature has produced instances that differ
from this prototypical narrator change. We assume that there are possibilities for
new stories that do not introduce new narrators, e.g., a homodiegetic narrator of the
frame story telling an embedded story he is not part of. Then, the narrative “I”/self
remains the same and consequently the speaker remains the same. We suppose
and suggest, though, that there is still a change of the narrator, namely a change
of the narrator’s position in relation to the story he tells. To give an example of
this change of the narrator’s position, we cite Max Frisch’s novel “I’m not Stiller”
below. James White alias Anatol Ludwig Stiller is the homodiegetic narrator of
most parts of the novel. During his imprisonment, he tells his defense counsel the
fairy tale of “Rip van Winkle”:

“You don’t know it?”
“What?”
“The story of Rip van Winkle?”
Only by means of this trick ― that’s to say by holding the lighter, which I relit
every time it went out, and with the cigar in the other hand, all the time in the point
of lighting the splendid cigar, indeed once setting the cigar aglow, so that all I had
to do was draw on it, but every time prevented ― prevented by Rip van Winkle,
whose story was obviously more acutely important than my cigar ― only by means
of this trick could I compel my busy defense counsel to listen at all.
The story goes something like this.
Rip van Winkle, a descendant of that intrepid van Winkle who opened up the country
of America while serving under Hendrik Hudson, was born lazybones but at the

81

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

same time, it seems, a thoroughly good fellow, who didn’t fish for the sake of the
fish but in order to dream, for his head was full of so-called thoughts, which had little
to do with his reality.As I spoke (this is important) I held his silver lighter with the
little flame without lighting the fragrant cigar, that one and only sensual pleasure
available to me in my imprisonment on remand, no, notwithstanding my avid desire
I repeated my question:
“You don’t know it?”
“What?”
“The story of Rip van Winkle?”
Only by means of this trick ― that’s to say by holding the lighter, which I relit every
time it went out, and with the cigar in the other hand, all the time in the point of
lighting the splendid cigar, indeed once setting the cigar aglow, so that all I had to
do was draw on it, but every time prevented ― prevented by Rip van Winkle, whose
story was obviously more acutely important than my cigar ― only by means of this
trick could I compel my busy defense counsel to listen at all.
The story goes something like this.
Rip van Winkle, a descendant of that intrepid van Winkle who opened up the country
of America while serving under Hendrik Hudson, was born lazybones but at the
same time, it seems, a thoroughly good fellow, who didn’t fish for the sake of the fish
but in order to dream, for his head was full of so-called thoughts, which had little
to do with his reality.
(Max Frisch: “I’m not Stiller”)

The above excerpt exemplifies how Stiller’s position changes in relation to the
stories he narrates. Once he starts telling the fairy tale of Rip van Winkle, he is no
longer part of the story as a character and thus, becomes a heterodiegetic narrator.
There is, however, no new speaker (and no new speech act). Accordingly, the
change from a homodiegetic to a heterodiegetic narrator is, in our understanding,
sufficient to form a new narrative level.

82

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Distant narrators: chronicler, collector, editor

Some narrators have a distanced relationship to the story they tell. This is demonstrated by confessing that they have access to a story by accident, e.g., the narrator
has found the manuscript or heard a well-known chronicle. Then, the purpose of
telling the story has an explicitly authenticating function.

Projected teller role As a special case of narrative texts, a projected teller role,
i.e., “an agent whose sole involvement with the text is its material dissemination,”32
always demands an additional narrative level (even if this level consists of only
one sentence). The most prominent example for a projected teller role is the figure
of an editor/publisher. In rare cases, the projected teller role might only become
visible towards the end of a literary text. Although up to this point there are no
signs of a frame story in the text, the existence of the editor/publisher figure makes
it necessary to consider the rest of the text as an embedded narrative level. In this
case, the inclusion scheme of a text (see Narrative levels) can only be recognizable
after having read the whole text.
Eduard Mörike’s novel “Lucie Gelmeroth” is an illustrative example of a projected
teller role. The text appears to start with a homodiegetic narrator that recounts his
holiday trip to Göttingen.
As a Göttingen student on a holiday trip, I – a German scholar tells in his still
unprinted memorabilia – wanted to visit my home town again, which I had not seen
for a long time [. . . ].

Although the first sentence refers already to a possible projected teller role, namely
the German scholar’s memorabilia, it is the ending of the novel that clarifies the
inclusion scheme:

83

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

This is where the narrator’s handwriting breaks off. We have searched in vain among
his papers to learn something of the fate of that fleeting merchant. Even with inquiries elsewhere we were not happier. (Eduard Mörike: “Lucie Gelmeroth,” translated by the authors)

The report of the found papers reveals that the student is in fact an intradiegetic
homodiegetic narrator of a second-degree narrative level. The first-degree narrator,
who only becomes visible at the end of the novel, turns out to be the editor.

The narrator as reporter
In contrast to the projected teller role, which introduces a new narrator to tell his
own story, there are narrators that not only have access to a story, but also mediate
the story on their own, e.g., chroniclers.33 For instance, in Eduard Mörike’s “Das
Stuttgarter Hutzelmännlein,” the narrator tells the story of Seppe and Vrone that
took place in 1220 from the standpoint of 500 years later. While Seppe talks to a
coachman, the narrator tells the “Story of Lau,” a different story, which took place
100 years earlier.
[. . . ] After this, hear the true and graceful story of Lau, the beautiful water nymph.
In Swabia, on the Alb, near the little town of Blaubeuren, just beyond the old monastery,
you can see beside a sheer rock face the big round basin of a wondrous spring called
the Blue Pool [. . . ]. (Eduard Mörike: “Das Stuttgarter Hutzelmännlein,” translated
by the authors)

In this case, there is neither a new narrator, nor a change in the narrator’s position in relation to the story he tells. He remains heterodiegetic. Nevertheless,
another change is perceivable: the narrator noticeably signalizes that a new story
will be told. This story, however, is not part of the superordinate level that deals
with Seppe and Vrone. It is instead a presentation of an old chronicle to which
84

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

the narrator has access. By mediating this chronicle, he therefore introduces a new
narrative level. Similar cases that one might think of could include reports of newspaper stories, letters or television coverage, but only if the report is mediated by
the narrator and functions as a narrative (see Narrative).

Distinction from related phenomena
Anachronisms

It is important to differentiate between narrative levels and anachronisms, e.g.,
analepses (flashbacks) and prolepses (flashforwards). While a new narrative is
initiated by a change of narrator (or his position/role), the narrator does not change
in anachronistic forms of narration. Instead, anachronisms concern the chronological order of the discours and do not leave the present narrative level.
Her father was becoming old lately, she noticed; he would miss her. Sometimes he
could be very nice. Not long before, when she had been laid up for a day, he had
read her out a ghost story and made toast for her at the fire. Another day, when their
mother was alive, they had all gone for a picnic to the Hill of Howth. [. . . ] Her time
was running out but she continued to sit by the window, leaning her head against
the window curtain, inhaling the odour of dusty cretonne. (James Joyce: “Eveline”)

The heterodiegetic narrator in James Joyce’s “Eveline” tells the story of Eveline
shortly before her planned emigration. There are several analepses in which Eveline reflects her childhood. In the excerpt above, she remembers a ghost story read
by her father and a picnic. The narrator also denotes a clearly noticeable temporal
shift. However, as there is no new narrator, no change of the narrator’s position in
relation to the story and no report of a distant narrator, the narrative level does not
change.

85

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

Forms of imagination

In some cases, a character’s thoughts, dreams, visions or fantasies are presented in
such an intense way that one might assume a new narrative level occurs.34 However, it is important to distinguish between an actual new narrative level – i.e.,
introduced by a change of the narrator – and a strong form of internal focalization (point of view). In Anton Pavlovich Chekhov’s “The Lottery Ticket,” Ivan
Dmitrich, one of the main characters, imagines what his life could be like, if he
won the lottery:
Ivan Dmitritch pictured to himself autumn with its rains, its cold evenings, and its
St. Martin’s summer. At that season he would have to take longer walks about the
garden and beside the river, so as to get thoroughly chilled, and then drink a big
glass of vodka and eat a salted mushroom or a soused cucumber, and then–drink
another. . . . The children would come running from the kitchen-garden, bringing a
carrot and a radish smelling of fresh earth. . . . And then, he would lie stretched full
length on the sofa, and in leisurely fashion turn over the pages of some illustrated
magazine, or, covering his face with it and unbuttoning his waistcoat, give himself
up to slumber. (Anton Pavlovich Chekhov “The Lottery Ticket”)

This example illustrates a strong form of the expression of thoughts that are, nevertheless, still mediated by the (same) narrator. While Ryan might argue for an
ontological boundary – Ivan’s imaginations as a new world –, this is, in our understanding, not sufficient for a change of the narrative level. As the narrator does not
change in the given example, the narrative level stays the same. Yet, in modern
literature even more radical forms of expressing inner thoughts (stream of consciousness) can be observed.35 Those forms are seemingly no more mediated by
the superordinate narrator.36 In certain cases, therefore, the narrator might change.
The experiencing character could then himself become the new narrator. However, this scenario is only possible, if the experiencing character is distinct from
the superordinate narrator.
86

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

Metalepses

In rare cases, a text does not allow for the annotation of narrative levels. This will
be the case, e.g., if the narrative levels cannot be separated logically, a phenomenon
that is called metalepsis.37 In Italo Calvino’s “If on a Winter’s Night a Traveler,”
the world of the reader/narrator (exegesis) is so closely interwoven with the story
(diegesis) that narrative levels can no longer be clearly distinguished from each
other. In such cases, we do not annotate any narrative levels besides the first level.

The espresso machines in station cafés boast their kinship with the locomotives, the
espresso machines of yesterday and today with the locomotives and steam engines
of today and yesterday. It’s all very well for me to come and go, shift and turn: I
am caught in a trap, in that nontemporal trap which all stations unfailingly set. A
cloud of coal dust still hovers in the air of stations all these years after the lines have
been totally electrified, and a novel that talks about trains and stations cannot help
conveying this odor of smoke. For a couple of pages now you have been reading
on, and this would be the time to tell you clearly whether this station where I have
got off is a station of the past or a station of today; instead the sentences continue
to move in vagueness, grayness, in a kind of no man’s land of experience reduced
to the lowest common denominator. Watch out: it is surely a method of involving
you gradually, capturing you in the story before you realize it’s a trap [. . . ].I am the
man who comes and goes between the bar and the telephone booth. Or, rather: that
man is called “I” and you know nothing else about him, just as this station is called
only “station” and beyond it there exists nothing except the unanswered signal of a
telephone ringing in a dark room of a distant city. I hang up the receiver, I await the
rattling flush, down through the metallic throat, I push the glass door again, head
toward the cups piled up to dry in a cloud of steam.
The espresso machines in station cafés boast their kinship with the locomotives, the
espresso machines of yesterday and today with the locomotives and steam engines
of today and yesterday. It’s all very well for me to come and go, shift and turn: I
am caught in a trap, in that nontemporal trap which all stations unfailingly set. A
cloud of coal dust still hovers in the air of stations all these years after the lines have
been totally electrified, and a novel that talks about trains and stations cannot help

87

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

conveying this odor of smoke. For a couple of pages now you have been reading
on, and this would be the time to tell you clearly whether this station where I have
got off is a station of the past or a station of today; instead the sentences continue
to move in vagueness, grayness, in a kind of no man’s land of experience reduced
to the lowest common denominator. Watch out: it is surely a method of involving
you gradually, capturing you in the story before you realize it’s a trap [. . . ]. (Italo
Calvino: “If on a Winter’s Night a Traveler”)

Annotation Guidelines
Before beginning the annotation process, the annotator has to read through the
entire literary text. Following that, all narrative levels in the text are searched for
according to the criteria defined in the Premises: How to find narrative levels.
They are annotated according to the following points:

Labeling
All narrative levels are annotated with square brackets (opening bracket at the start
and closing bracket at the end of a narrative level).38

Numeration
The narrative levels are annotated with numbers (1, 2, 3 etc.) as a first and letters (a, b, c etc.) as a second differentiator. Each text has at least one narrative
level and a corresponding number [1]. Letters are only used to denote a sequential
arrangement and therefore not always utilized.
a. The numbers indicate the degree of the narrative level (inclusion scheme).
E.g., level 2 refers to a narrative level that is embedded into a superordinate
level. Level 2 is a second-degree narrative or, in other words, an embedded
story. Max Frisch’s novel “Stiller” is one example: An embedded story (the
88

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

fairytale of Rip van Winkle) is narrated by one of the novel’s characters and
enclosed into the first-degree narrative or frame story (level 1).39
b. Stories that are on the same narrative level (sequential arrangement) are identified by letters (a, b, c). Boccaccio’s “Il Decamerone” is an example of sequentially arranged stories, which contain several separate novellas on the
same narrative level – a series of embedded stories (see Figure 1). The arrangement of the individual novellas that are embedded in the frame story
would correspond to the numbering 2a, 2b, 2c.

Using the brackets
How to use the square brackets to separate the different narrative levels:
a. The brackets are marked with the number and, if applicable, a letter on both,
the opening and closing brackets. E.g., [1 . . . ]1 .
b. Inclusion scheme: The superordinate narrative level (e.g., first-degree narrative) starts before the embedded level (e.g., second-degree narrative). The
brackets of the superordinate level close after the brackets of the embedded
level: [1 . . . [2 … ]2 … ]1 .
c. Sequential arrangement: The square bracket of the first sequentially ordered
narrative level (e.g., 2a) closes before opening the square bracket of the second sequentially ordered narrative level (e.g., 2b): [1 … [2a . . . ]2a … [2b . . .
]2b … ]1 .
d. Punctuation – this includes dashes and semicolons – is not separated from
the preceding word.
(1)

[1 . . .[2 “On a march in the Rhine campaign,” ]2 began the officer, [2 “I noticed,
after a battle we had had with the enemy . . .” ]2 ]1 (Heinrich von Kleist:
“Improbable Veracities”)

89

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

Embedded narrative levels and projected teller role
As a rule, a narrative text starts with the first narrative level, level 1, and may have
other narrative levels embedded (level 2 and so on).
(2) [1 It is a matter most convenient (deare Ladies) that a man ought to begin whatsoever
he doth, in the great and glorious name of him, who was the Creator of all thinges.
Wherefore, seeing that I am the man appointed, to begin this your invention of discoursing
Novelties: I intend to begin also with one of his wonderfull workes. To the end, that this
beeing heard, our hope may remaine on him, as the thing onely permanent, and his name
for ever to be praised by us. […] As manifestly will appeare, by the Novell which I intend
to relate; manifestly (I say) not as in the judgment of God, but according to the
apprehension of men. [2 There was one named, Musciatto Francesi, who from beeing a
most rich and great merchant in France, was become a Knight, and preparing to go into
Tuscany, with Monsieur Charles without Land, Brother to the King of France (who was
desired and incited to come thither by Pope Boniface) found his affaires greatly intricated
here and there (as oftentimes the matters of Merchants fall out to bee) and that very hardly
hee should sodainly unintangle them, without referring the charge of them to divers
persons. And for all he tooke indifferent good order, onely he remained doubtfull, whom
he might sufficiently leave, to recover his debts among many Burgundians … ]2 The Novell
recited by Pamphilus was highly pleasing to the company, and much commended by the
Ladies: and after it had beene diligently observed among them, the Queen commanded
Madam Neiphila (who was seated neerest to Pamphilus) that, in relating another of hers,
she should follow on in the pastime thus begun. … ]1 (Boccaccio: “Il Decamerone”)

An extension to this rule is needed for narrative texts with a projected teller role that
requires its own narrative level. In this case, the projected teller role is annotated
as the frame story (level 1), although this special case might only become clearly
visible at the end of the narrative text.
(3) DECEMBER 6.
[1 [2 . . . How her image haunts me! Waking or asleep, she fills my entire soul! Soon as I
close my eyes, here, in my brain, where all the nerves of vision are concentrated, her dark
eyes are imprinted . . . ]2 ]1

90

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

THE EDITOR TO THE READER.
[1 It is a matter of extreme regret that we want original evidence of the last remarkable
days of our friend; and we are, therefore, obliged to interrupt the progress of his
correspondence, and to supply the deficiency by a connected narration . . . ]1 (J. W. v.
Goethe: “The sorrows of young Werther”)

Paratexts
As seen in the examples above, paratexts40 such as book titles, forewords, chapter
headings and genre indications must not be annotated. If the narrative level remains
the same, the square bracket of the narrative level is closed before a chapter heading
and reopened afterwards with the same level.
(4) [1 By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; the great
flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild conceits that swayed me to
my purpose, two and two there floated into my inmost soul, endless processions of the
whale, and, mid most of them all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air. ]1
CHAPTER 2. The Carpet-Bag
[1 I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my arm, and started for
Cape Horn and the Pacific. Quitting the good city of old Manhatto, I duly arrived in New
Bedford. It was a Saturday night in December. Much was I disappointed upon learning
that the little packet for Nantucket had already sailed, and that no way of reaching that
place would offer, till the following Monday. ]1 (Herman Melville: “Moby Dick”)

Syntactically bound headings
Headings that belong semantically and syntactically to a narrative level are exceptions to this rule. Those are assigned to the associated narrative level (normally to
the superordinate level).
(5) [1 . . .[n After this, hear the true and graceful
91

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

story of Lau, the beautiful water nymph ]n 41
[2 In Swabia, on the Alb, near the little town of Blaubeuren, close behind the old
monastery, you can see beside a sheer rock face the big round basin of a wondrous spring
called the Blue Pool . . . ]2 ]1 (Eduard Mörike: “Das Stuttgarter Hutzelmännlein,”
translated by the authors)

Interruption of narrative levels
Narrative levels can be interrupted by other narrative levels. E.g., in a seconddegree narrative, inserts from the first-degree narrative might occur. Two cases of
interruption are possible:
a. interruption by verba dicendi that refer to the narrative situation and thus
belong to the superordinate level (e.g., “the old man said”),
b. interruption by a speech act, e.g., by addressing a character of the superordinate level (e.g., “listen, ladies and gentlemen”).
In case of such inserts, the embedded level is closed at the beginning of the insert and reopened after the insert with the same numbering. In example (6), three
sequential embedded stories (2a, 2b, 2c) are told; the following extract contains
the third story (2c) which is interrupted by short parts of the first-degree frame
story, namely a verbum dicendi (“the officer continued”) and a form of address
(“gentlemen”).
Both forms of interruption can occur next to each other and do not need to be
annotated separately (example (7): “‘well then,’ he said”). The inserts can consist
of single words (“well”) or several phrases, as shown in example (7).
(6) [1 The country gentleman was of the opinion that he knew how to choose well those
stories that would verify his proposition. [2c “The third story,” ]2c the officer continued,

92

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

[2c “took place in the war of independence of the Netherlands, at the siege of Antwerp by
the Duke of Parma. The duke had blocked the Schelde river by means of a bridge of ships
and the Antwerpers were working on their side, under the leadership of a talented Italian,
to explode the bridge by means of fire boats that they launched against it. In that moment,
]2c gentlemen, [2c in which the vessels float down the Schelde to the bridge, there stands,
observe well, a cadet officer on the left bank of the Schelde right next to the Duke of
Parma …” ]2c Go to the Devil! shouted the country gentleman …]1 (Heinrich von Kleist:
“Improbable Veracities”)

(7) [1 [2 . . . The old man looked at me with a smile of understanding. “Well, then,” he
said, [3 “in the middle of the last century, or rather, to be more exact, before and after the
middle, there was a dikegrave here who understood more about dikes, drains and sluices
than peasants and farmers usually do; yet even so it seems hardly to have been enough,
for he had read but little of what learned experts have written about such things, and had
only thought out his own knowledge for himself from the time he was a little child. ]3 You
have probably heard, sir, that the Friesians are good at figures and undoubtedly you have
heard some talk too about our Hans Mommsen of Fahretoft, who was a peasant and yet
could make compasses and chronometers, telescopes and organs. Well, [3 the father of
this dikegrave was a bit like that too; only a bit, to be sure. . .” ]3 ]2 ]1 (Theodor Storm:
“The Rider of the White Horse”)

Non-Narrative Passages
Sometimes a narrator interrupts the story in order to make a comment that is independent of the story, i.e., without addressing a character of any narrative level in the
fictional world (see Exegesis and diegesis). Such aphorisms, mottos, comments,
judgments, thoughts and forms of address to the fictional addressee42 are annotated
as parts of the current narrative level and are not regarded as an independent narrative level. Since it may be beneficial for some cases (e.g., the narrator’s judgment
with the plot), we nevertheless annotate those expressions as “non-narrative.”
To annotate non-narrative parts we use square brackets followed by the letter n.
This indicates that they do not form an independent narrative level nor belong to
93

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

the superordinate level (see Interruption of narrative levels). Opening brackets
are used to signal the beginning and closing brackets to signal the end of the expression. The examples (8), (9) and (10) contain elements that address a fictional
recipient and that are therefore considered as non-narrative parts.
(8) [1 That puzzled the Leopard and the Ethiopian, but they set off to look for the
aboriginal Flora, and presently, after ever so many days, they saw a great, high, tall forest
full of tree trunks all ’sclusively speckled and sprottled and spottled, dotted and splashed
and slashed and hatched and cross-hatched with shadows. [n (Say that quickly aloud, and
you will see how very shadowy the forest must have been.) ]n ]1 (Rudyard Kipling: “How
the Leopard got his Spots”)

(9) [1 That was the first long separation, for almost twelve hours. [n Poor Effi! ]n How
was she to pass the evening? To go to bed early would be inadvisable, for she would wake
up and not be able to go to sleep again, and would listen for every sound. No, it would be
best to wait till she was very tired and then enjoy a sound sleep. She wrote a letter to her
mother and then went to see Mrs. Kruse, whose condition aroused her sympathy. ]1
(Theodor Fontane: “Effi Briest”)43

(10) [1 In the days when everybody started fair, [n Best Beloved ]n ,the Leopard lived in a
place called the High Veldt. [n ‘Member ]n it wasn’t the Low Veldt, or the Bush Veldt, or
the Sour Veldt, but …’ ]1 (Rudyard Kipling: “How the Leopard got his Spots”)

Notes
1

Cf. Matías Martínez and Michael Scheffel, Einführung in die Erzähltheorie, 7th edition (Munich: C. H. Beck, 2009),

2

M. H. Abrams, “Narrative and Narratology,” in A Glossary of Literary Terms (Orlando, 1999), 173.

7.

3

Cf. Jan Christoph Meister, “Narratology,” in Handbook of Narratology, 2nd, fully revised and expanded edition, ed.
Peter Hühn et al. (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2014), 623, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110316469.623.

94

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

4

Cf. Gérard Genette, Narrative Discourse Revisited (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988), 13–15.

5

Genette, 13.

6

Genette, 84.

7

Cf. Marie-Laure Ryan, Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence, and Narrative Theory (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991), 178–82; cf. John Pier, “Narrative Levels,” in Handbook of Narratology, 2nd, fully revised and expanded edition, ed. Peter Hühn et al. (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2014), 547, https://doi.org/10.1515/978311031646
9.547.
8

Genette, Narrative Discourse Revisited, 84; cf. Pier, “Narrative Levels,” 547–49.

9

Cf. Ryan, Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence, and Narrative Theory, 175–77.

10

Cf. Silke Lahn and Jan Christoph Meister, Einführung in die Erzähltextanalyse, 2nd, revised edition (Stuttgart, Weimar:
Metzler, 2013), 83.
11

Cf. Ryan, Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence, and Narrative Theory, 175–77.

12

Cf. Lahn and Meister, Einführung in die Erzähltextanalyse, 83–84.

13

Cf. H. Porter Abbott, “Narrativity,” in Handbook of Narratology, 2nd, fully revised and expanded edition, ed. Peter Hühn et al. (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2014), 587–90, https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1515 / 9783110316469 . 587; cf. Wolf
Schmid, Elemente der Narratologie (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2014), 17.
14

Cf. Schmid, Elemente der Narratologie, 17–18.

15

Genette’s term histoire is oftentimes translated as story. Our concept of story is not delimited to the whole literary
text but rather used for single narrative levels.
16

Cf. Martínez and Scheffel, Einführung in die Erzähltheorie, 109–10; cf. Wolf Schmid, “Ereignis,” in Grundthemen
der Literaturwissenschaft: Erzählen, ed. Martin Huber and Wolf Schmid (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2018), 312–13,
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110410747-015.
17

Cf. Natalia Igl, “Erzähler und Erzählstimme,” in Grundthemen der Literaturwissenschaft: Erzählen, ed. Martin Huber and Wolf Schmid (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2018), 127, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110410747-006.
18

Within narratology there are different positions regarding the importance of the narrator: it is still debated whether
the narrator “designates the highest-level speech position” in a literary text and is, therefore, a “strictly textual category” that “should be clearly distinguished from the author” Uri Margolin, “Narrator,” in the living handbook of narratology, ed. Peter Hühn et al. (Hamburg: Hamburg University Press, 2014), or whether narrative texts are conceivable without a narrator. Cf. Igl, “Erzähler und Erzählstimme,” 128–29.

95

N A R R AT I V E L E V E L S A N D T H E I R A N N O TAT I O N I N T H E D I G I TA L C O N T E X T

19

Cf. Gérard Genette, Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1980), 244–45.

20

The term “autodiegetic narrator” has prevailed in the case of a homodiegetic narrator that is the main character. In
our use, however, this further distinction is not necessary.
21

Cf. Lahn and Meister, Einführung in die Erzähltextanalyse, 70; cf. Monika Fludernik, An Introduction to Narratology (Abingdon: Routledge, 2009), 90.
22

Cf. Lahn and Meister, Einführung in die Erzähltextanalyse, 72.

23

Cf. Pier, “Narrative Levels,” 549–58.

24

Cf. Manfred Jahn, Narratology: A Guide to the Theory of Narrative (Cologne: University of Cologne, 2017).

25

Didier Coste and John Pier, “Narrative Levels,” in Handbook of Narratology, ed. Peter Hühn et al. (Berlin, New York:
De Gruyter, 2009), 301, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110217445.295.
26

Cf. Genette, Narrative Discourse Revisited, 84.

27

Cf. Schmid, Elemente der Narratologie, 7.

28

Cf. Ryan, Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence, and Narrative Theory, 175–77.

29

Ryan states that “[i]llocutionary boundaries delimit speech acts within a text or a conversation, and their crossing
introduces a new speaker or a new narrator” Ryan, 175. An actually crossed illocutionary boundary would introduce a
new speaker. This is “illustrated by directly quoted dialogues” on the micro-level and, e.g., by “narratives of personal
experience” on the macro-level Ryan, 176. Virtually crossed illocutionary boundaries, however, are presented through
the narrator. The character’s speech act is mediated by the narrator, e.g., as in indirect speech cf. Ryan, 177. An ontological boundary “transports the reader to a new system of reality” Ryan, 177. If the boundary is actually crossed, the new
system will be described as location of the fictional reality – at least temporarily. Hence, the new system of reality is described from within its own boundaries cf. Ryan, 177. On the contrary, if the boundary is virtually crossed, the new system will be anchored in “an external perspective”, the system will be described “with repeated reminders of its [. . . ] status in the primary reality” Ryan, 177.
30

Genette, Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method, 24.

31

Cf. Genette, Narrative Discourse Revisited, 84–95.

32

Marie-Laure Ryan, “The Narratorial Functions,” Contemporary Narratology 9, no. 2 (2001): 151.

33

A chronicler, “like every good historian, must at least attest to the truthfulness of his sources” Genette, Narrative
Discourse Revisited, 131. Regarding those narrators it is not always easy to decide whether they are homodiegetic or heterodiegetic narrators . Although they are part of the diegetic world, there is a temporal distance between them and the

96

J O U R N A L O F C U LT U R A L A N A LY T I C S

narrated world.
34

Cf. Pier, “Narrative Levels,” 550.

35

Cf. Martínez and Scheffel, Einführung in die Erzähltheorie, 61–63.

36

Cf. Igl, “Erzähler und Erzählstimme,” 127.

37

Cf. John Pier, “Metalepsis,” in the living handbook of narratology, ed. Peter Hühn et al. (Hamburg: Hamburg University Press, 2016).
38

The annotation may be done in another way, too (e.g., with different colors marking the belonging to a certain narrative level), depending on the annotation tool that is used.
39

Cf. Jahn, Narratology: A Guide to the Theory of Narrative.

40

Cf. Gérard Genette, Paratexts. Thresholds of Interpretation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).

41

The abbreviation n stands for “non-narrative” and is explained in section Non-Narrative Passages below.

42

Cf. Schmid, Elemente der Narratologie, 7.

43

Just to be clear, the sentences “How was she to pass the evening? To go to bed early would be inadvisable, for she
would wake up and not be able to go to sleep again, and would listen for every sound” are free indirect discourse and
therefore not an evaluative commentary by the narrator as “Poor Effi!” is.

97

