Journal of
Cultural Analytics

February 9, 2022

Shakespeare and Company Project Data
Sets
Joshua Kotin, Rebecca Sutton Koeser
Joshua Kotin, Rebecca Sutton Koeser, Princeton University
Peer-Reviewer: Rachel Buurma
Data Repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/QXPNLS
Article DOI: https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.32551

ABSTRACT
This article describes three data sets from the Shakespeare and Company Project. The data sets
provide information about Shakespeare and Company, Sylvia Beach’s bookshop and lending
library in interwar Paris. The first data set focuses on the members of the lending library. The
second, on the books that circulated in the lending library. The third, on the events—borrows,
purchases, subscriptions, renewals, deposits, reimbursements—that connected members and
books. Together, the three data sets promise to address and bridge concerns in modernist studies,
the digital humanities, and the public humanities. Work on the data sets began in 2014. The first
two versions of the data sets were released in 2020 and 2021, respectively. The current version,
1.2, was released in 2022. Over forty people have contributed to the data sets.

1. Overview
What if Sylvia Beach had had access to a computer at Shakespeare and Company,
her bookshop and lending library in interwar Paris? What if she had used the
computer to record the names and addresses of lending library members, along with
the books they bought and borrowed? Gertrude Stein paying fifty francs for her first
lending library membership on March 16, 1920. James Joyce moving to a new
apartment in the seventh arrondissement on November 1, 1922. Ernest Hemingway
borrowing Ivan Turgenev’s The Torrents of Spring (1872, translation 1897) on
October 27, 1925. Thousands of transactions. Thousands of addresses. Thousands
of books. One computer.1

Journal of Cultural Analytics 7.1 (2022): 1-35.

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

What if scholars and the general public had access to that computer today? What
would we learn about Paris in the 1920s and 1930s; about the Lost Generation; about
Stein, Joyce, and Hemingway? What books would we re-discover? Whose lives
would we be able to explore? How would the computer change our understanding
of modernism, and cultural and intellectual history more generally?
The Shakespeare and Company Project is that computer—or more accurately, that
relational database and web application. The Project uses documents from the Sylvia
Beach Papers at Princeton University Library and other libraries to give researchers
and the general public access to the world of Shakespeare and Company. The Project
focuses on the Shakespeare and Company lending library, which operated alongside
the eponymous bookshop and publishing house. (Beach published three books under
the Shakespeare and Company imprint—all related to Joyce. Most significantly, she
published Ulysses, which she tenaciously kept in print through eleven printings
between 1922 and 1930.)2 Visitors to the Project website can browse and search the
lending library’s membership and holdings, explore maps of Paris, and track the
borrowing histories of specific writers and the circulation of specific books. Want to
know what Stein read in 1921? Want to know whether she read the same books as
her neighbors in the 6th arrondissement—or as other Americans or women or fortysomethings? The Project can address these questions and many more.
The Project makes its data available in three data sets, which may be downloaded in
CSV and JSON formats. The data sets allow for more ambitious, versatile, detailed,
and efficient analysis. The first data set focuses on lending library members or
“subscribers,” and includes addresses, membership years, and demographic
information. The second data set focuses on books and periodicals (and other
formats), and includes borrow and purchase counts, circulation years, and
bibliographic information. The third data set focuses on lending library events, and
includes information about borrows, purchases, subscriptions, renewals, and other
transactions. (These events connect members and books.) The data sets may be used
individually or in combination: Project URIs serve as consistent identifiers across
all three. The data sets are the foundation of the Project, a link between the world of
Shakespeare and Company and our own.

2

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

This article provides an account of the Shakespeare and Company Project data
sets—their sources, history, structure, limitations, and potential. The article has six
sections. It begins with an introduction to the lending library and the Project’s three
sets of archival sources. The article then provides an overview of the data collection
and data structuring process before focusing on the individual data sets. The article
concludes with a discussion of the limitations and potential of the data sets, as well
as plans for future refinement and augmentation.
Work on the data sets began in 2014. The first version of the Project data sets was
released in August 2020, the second in January 2021 (version 1.1), and the third in
January 2022 (1.2). Over forty people—the Project team—have worked on the data
sets, including thirty graduate and undergraduate students. (A full list of contributors
is available on the credits page of the Project website.) This work was supported by
grants and in-kind support from multiple departments, programs, and centers at
Princeton University: The Center for Digital Humanities; the Office of the Dean for
Research and the Innovation Fund for New Ideas in the Humanities; the Humanities
Council and the David A. Gardner ’69 Magic Grants; the Princeton-Mellon Initiative
in Architecture, Urbanism, and the Humanities; the Bain-Swiggett Fund,
Department of English; and the Office of the Dean of Faculty and the University
Committee on Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences.

2. The Shakespeare and Company Lending Library
On November 17, 1919, Sylvia Beach opened Shakespeare and Company at 8 rue
Dupuytren on the Left Bank in Paris.3 From the beginning, it operated as a bookshop
and a lending library. Beach modeled the business on La Maison des Amis des
Livres, a French-language bookshop and lending library owned by Adrienne
Monnier, Beach’s life partner. English-language books were expensive and difficult
to obtain in interwar Paris. Shakespeare and Company made a diverse range of
English-language material available—canonical novels, avant-garde magazines,
detective fiction, philosophy, poetry. In 1921, Shakespeare and Company moved to
its famous location at 12 rue de l’Odéon, across the street from La Maison des Amis
des Livres. The bookshop and lending library operated until 1941, when it closed

3

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

due to the Nazi occupation of France. Beach’s Shakespeare and Company never
reopened, but she loaned books privately from her apartment until her death in 1962.4
The lending library was a subscription business. Members paid a deposit and
recurring fees to maintain access to the lending library’s holdings. When
Shakespeare and Company opened, members had eight subscription options: they
could subscribe for one, three, six, or twelve months, and borrow either one or two
books at a time. The least expensive option—one month, one book at a time—cost
eight francs. Adding a second book raised the price to twelve francs. The most
expensive option—one year, two books at a time—cost eighty francs. Members had
to pay a deposit to join—initially seven francs if they chose to borrow one book at a
time, fourteen for two. Members of La Maison des Amis des Livres received a
twenty percent discount and did not have to pay a deposit, presumably because they
had already paid one to Monnier. The deposit was reimbursed when the subscription
ended.
Lending library books could be exchanged on the same day or borrowed for up to
two weeks—one week for recent publications. Fines for overdue books were ten
centimes per day. Borrowing recent periodicals cost an extra fifteen centimes per
day. Subscription costs gradually increased over the next twenty years, as did the
number of subscription options. Beach introduced various plans or subscription
categories, including discounts for students and teachers, and for members willing
to forego access to recent publications. Members living outside Paris had to pay ten
percent extra and cover postage costs for mailing books. Members could purchase
“day-by-day” memberships, or pay additional fees or “supplements” to increase their
privileges.5 At its height in January 1926, the lending library had 249 active
members, who had access to thousands of books.6 Members included American and
English expatriates, including artists and writers, and businessmen and their
families; French intellectuals; students; scholars; teachers; tourists.

3. Archival Sources
3.1. Collections

4

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

The data sets include information from archival collections at three libraries: the
Sylvia Beach Papers at Princeton University Library Special Collections, the Joyce
Collection at the University at Buffalo Libraries, and the Carlton Lake Collection at
the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin.
In 1964, Princeton acquired Beach’s papers and book collection.7 Beach had
connections to the town and university: her father, Sylvester, had been a minister at
the First Presbyterian Church of Princeton, and she had worked at the university as
a young adult. Her papers are extensive: 180 boxes, over seventy-eight linear feet.
The papers include correspondence; lending library records and other business
material (publisher receipts, tax returns, Ulysses business); manuscripts and
typescripts from Joyce and others; drafts of Beach’s memoir; photographs; and much
else. Beach was an obsessive record keeper: she kept notebooks to track almost every
aspect of her life, from routine chores (groceries, haircuts) to the distribution of
Ulysses.
Beach’s papers at Princeton are by far the most important source for the data sets
and the Shakespeare and Company Project as a whole. But documents from the
University at Buffalo and the Harry Ransom Center also play a role. In 1959, Beach
sold much of her Joyce material to the University at Buffalo. In 1962, after her death,
Buffalo acquired additional Joyce material from her estate. The James Joyce
Collection, which includes additional acquisitions, comprises eighty-nine boxes—
over twenty-two linear feet. In 1986, the Ransom Center acquired Maurice Saillet’s
Collection of Sylvia Beach and Shakespeare and Company—four boxes, almost two
linear feet. The Saillet collection includes material related to Joyce, Shakespeare and
Company, and Beach’s personal life. The Shakespeare and Company Project only
displays digital editions of material from Princeton on its website.

3.2. Lending Library Cards, Logbooks, Address Books
The data sets rely on information from three sets of sources: lending library cards,
logbooks, and address books.

5

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

The lending library cards provide information about members and book circulation.
(The Project uses “book” as a catch-all term: periodicals as well as articles,
photographs, phonograph records, and prints circulated in the lending library.) The
cards are 12 cm by 17 cm, and usually include the lending library member’s name,
address or addresses, membership dates, and membership duration and type—
“1m1v,” for example, stands for one month, one volume at a time. The cards also
generally include the member’s borrowing activity in three columns: the first column
includes the date a book was borrowed; the second, the book’s title; and the third,
the date the book was returned. (Beach or one of her assistants would occasionally
write “BB”—“brought back”—in the third column instead of a date.) The cards also
often include notes about the fate of specific books and the activities of specific
members. (See figure 1.) Beach kept separate records for book purchases at
Shakespeare and Company, but occasionally recorded purchases and consignments
on the cards. On Caresse Crosby’s cards, for example, Beach lists five Black Sun
Press books that Crosby consigned to Shakespeare and Company. (Crosby was the
co-publisher of the press.) The purchases listed on the lending library cards do not
offer a representative portrait of book sales at Shakespeare and Company.
The Project has identified cards or sets of cards for 654 lending library members.
Some members have only one card. The most prolific member, Alice Killen, has
twenty-seven: twenty-five of which are double sided. Killen’s cards include
information about 1,480 borrows. The earliest card in the data set is from November
17, 1919 and the latest is from June 28, 1962. Of the 654 cards or sets of cards, all
but six are at Princeton. (Many Joyce family cards are at Buffalo.) The vast majority
of the Princeton cards are in box forty-three of the Beach Papers: the Project displays
digital editions of the entire contents of box on its website.8

6

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 1. Ernest Hemingway’s Lending Library Card from 1925, Annotated

The logbooks provide information about daily revenue and expenses at Shakespeare
and Company. The Project uses the logbooks for information about membership
“events.” The logbooks are organized by date, and generally include a member’s
name, subscription duration and category, fee, and deposit and reimbursement
amounts. (See figure 2.) The logbooks also include information about supplemental
fees. (Revenue usually appears on the verso page and expenses on the recto.) Beach
or one of her assistants often indicate whether a membership was a new subscription
or a renewal, although these indicators are not always reliable: renewals are
occasionally marked as new subscriptions and vice versa. (New subscriptions
usually include a deposit, but not always: members of La Maison des Amis des
Livres were not required to pay a deposit, and Beach did not always require deposits
7

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

from friends or well-known writers.) The Project makes use of sixty-six separate
logbooks, which include information about over 13,039 subscription events. Sixtyfive logbooks are part of the Beach Papers; the other is held by the Harry Ransom
Center and includes reimbursements that Adrienne Monnier paid lending library
members after Shakespeare and Company closed. There are multiple versions of
some logbooks—rough and fair copies—and gaps in logbook coverage, especially
in the early and late 1930s.9 The Project provides access to digital editions of all the
logbooks at Princeton via a supplementary site hosted by Princeton University
Library.

Figure 2. A Logbook Page from February 1922, Annotated

8

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

The address books provide information about lending library members: names,
addresses, and membership dates and payments. (See figure 3.) The Project uses two
address books from the Beach Papers. One address book includes information for
2,706 members who joined the lending library before 1935. The second features
information for 321 members who joined after 1935. The first address book is a good
example of Beach’s meticulous, yet inconsistent record-keeping practices: it
carefully lists members in alphabetical order and then stops midway through the
letter “N.”

Figure 3. The First Page of the Pre-1935 Address Book

9

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

3.3. Completeness, Complementarity, Consistency
As the above descriptions make clear, the Project’s archival sources are incomplete.
The Project relies on cards for 654 members, but the logbooks and address books
reveal that the Shakespeare and Company lending library had thousands of members.
The Project relies on logbooks for daily lending library transactions, but there are
gaps in logbook coverage. One of the two address books omits members with last
names from the second half of the alphabet.
The sources are incomplete in other ways as well. The cards only list books by title.
As a result, identifying books can be difficult. For example, the Project team is
uncertain whether “Three Loves” refers to Max Brod’s Three Loves (1929) or A. J.
Cronin’s Three Loves (1932). (All the borrowing events are from after 1932,
suggesting that Cronin’s Three Loves circulated in the lending library.) The cards
and the address books occasionally include incomplete dates—a year and a month,
or just a year or a month, or no date at all. Moreover, the cards and address books
occasionally include incomplete addresses—hotels without street addresses, home
addresses without street numbers. All three sources refer to married women by their
husbands’ names, and do not always or even often include first names. Finally, the
handwriting of Beach and her assistants can be difficult to decipher. When possible,
the Project team compensates for missing data using other sources in the Beach
Papers and beyond: a notebook in the Beach Papers, for example, lists acquisitions
to the lending library, and includes both titles and author names; the contemporary
directories Americans in France supply first names of some lending library
members.
Yet all three archival sources are also complementary. Sources substantiate one
another, while compensating for gaps and absences. Most significantly, the logbooks
and address books reveal information about members without extant cards. The
address books and cards also supply membership information during gaps in
logbook coverage; and the address books supply first names that are not in the
logbooks or cards. Together, the three archival sources provide a near-complete
portrait of the Shakespeare and Company lending library.

10

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

On rare occasions, sources are inconsistent. The most common discrepancy concerns
the use of English and French personal titles or honorifics. The same member is
often listed as both a “Miss” and a “Mlle.” Occasionally, a member is listed as both
a “Miss” and a “Mrs.” (Beach and her assistants might have chosen titles based on
assumptions about a member’s age.) Another discrepancy concerns subscription and
renewal dates on the lending library cards and the logbooks. Beach or her assistants
would often back or forward date subscriptions and renewals on the lending library
cards. For example, if a member’s one-month subscription expired on March 1,
1936, and the member renewed on February 27, 1936, Beach or an assistant would
start the new subscription on March 1, 1936 and include that date on the card. In
such cases, however, the logbooks indicate the actual purchase date. The events data
set includes membership start and end dates, and purchase dates—for more
information about membership timelines refer to section 4.5 of this article.
When evaluating the Project’s archival sources, researchers should keep in mind that
the sources reflect the work of a small and overwhelmed lending library staff,
keeping records to facilitate the day-to-day operation of a business, not the work of
future literary historians and data scientists. Why would Beach record the author of
“Three Loves” when she knew exactly which book she had available to borrow? The
archival sources also reflect the impact of time and the vicissitudes of interwar and
wartime France. (Beach was interned for six months during World War II.)
Additional factors affect the completeness of the sources as well. Beach would
occasionally sell or give away archival materials. The Beach Papers themselves are
imperfectly organized. For example, lending library cards have been discovered in
miscellaneous folders in the Beach Papers.

4. History of the Data Sets
4.1. TEI: Structure
Understanding how the data sets were created is important for understanding their
functionality and potential. The Project’s sources are not uniform. Standardizing and
formalizing the information they contain was a complex, labor-intensive process.
Working on the Project, the Project team confronted a series of challenges, and did
11

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

its best to identify solutions that respected Beach’s work and the Project’s limited
budget. From the beginning, the Project team recognized the value (and
inevitability) of embracing a process of trial and error. The data sets are the result of
that process.
The creation of the data sets began with a transcription and encoding project.
Clifford Wulfman led a team of Princeton students as they transcribed and encoded
the lending library cards, following a customized Text Encoding Initiative (TEI)
schema. Soon a second team began to transcribe and encode information from the
logbooks. This work led to three sets of TEI files. The first set included a complete
transcription and encoding of the lending library cards. The second, a partial
transcription and encoding of the logbooks, focusing exclusively on lending library
information. The third, a personography of the people referenced on the cards and
in the logbooks, using TEI tags to document names, birth and death dates,
nationality, addresses, etc. Local identifiers were used across all three sets to link
people. The Project team made the decision to partially transcribe and encode the
logbooks for practical reasons: there wasn’t sufficient funding or time to support full
transcription and encoding.

4.2. TEI: Research
Work on the personography involved significant research. The Project team
matched member names to Virtual International Authority File (VIAF) numbers, and
identified longitude and latitude coordinates for the addresses. The Project team also
corrected and standardized names and addresses, and began adding basic personal
information about members. Finally, the Project team developed gender and
nationality guidelines to support this research. Nick Budak’s “Representing Gender
in the Shakespeare and Company Project” (2019) provides an account of how and
why the Project represents gender.10
During this stage of the Project, OpenRefine was used to group book titles in the
lending library card files. (Beach and her assistants would often refer to the same
book by different titles—“Portrait of the Artist,” “A Portrait of the Artist,” “A
Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man.”) This work resulted in the addition of title
identifiers to the lending library card files.
12

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

4.3. TEI to Relational Database
In 2016, the Project team assessed the TEI and determined that a relational database
would be better suited for connecting and analyzing information from the archival
sources. In 2017, Jean Bauer designed a preliminary relational database structure.
(See figure 4.) The structure added something that was previously implicit:
“accounts” to connect members and events. This structure allowed the Project to
accommodate cases where two members—for example, life partners, family
members—shared an account.

Figure 4. Initial Database Diagram, 2017

In 2017 and 2018, the database structure was iteratively implemented and refined
using a series of scripts to extract data from the TEI documents. The database and
scripts were implemented in the Python programming language, using the Django
web framework. Data was progressively imported into the database, starting with
the simplest data—the personography—and then the logbook and card data.11 (See
figure 5.) As each phase of import was completed, data work shifted from the TEI

13

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

to the administrative interface of the database. Eventually, the TEI data was
documented as in-progress work toward the Project and archived.

Figure 5. Flow of Information from Archival Souces to TEI Files to Relational Database

4.4. Relational Database: Structure
The database was designed around three modules, which would later define the
structure of the data sets: people, books, and accounts. The people module stores
information about members: name or names, gender, title, birth and death years,
relationships, profession or professions, nationality or nationalities, and VIAF
number. (See figure 6.) Gender, nationality, and profession are based on controlled
lists. (The Project does not currently use the relationships or professions feature.)
There is a Boolean field to differentiate “members” identified as organizations,
rather than individuals. (The journal, Nouvelle revue critique, had a membership, for
example.) The module can also store one or more informational URLs (such as links
14

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

to Wikipedia pages). The Project uses “slugs” to create URIs for people. The URIs
are used for access on the Project website and as identifiers in the data sets. The
database tracks past slugs for modified person records to resolve changed URIs. The
person table also includes a datetime field that automatically updates whenever the
main record is saved.

Figure 6. Database Diagram for People Module

The book module stores books as works. (See figure 7.) Works can have a format—
book, periodical, photograph, etc.—and subjects and genres. Works can also have
specific editions. The Project uses the editions feature to document volumes of
multivolume works and issues of periodicals, not the specific editions of books that
circulated in the lending library.12 The module allows for a customizable list of
creator types: author, editor, etc. Creators are also stored in the people module and
associated with VIAF numbers, enabling the publication of a creators data set in the
future. The books module can also store links to eBooks, which allow visitors to the

15

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

Project website to read the books that circulated in the lending library. The Project
uses slugs for books in the same way it uses slugs for people.

Figure 7. Database Diagram for Books Module

The third module of the database—accounts—connects people and books, and stores
information about library member events. (See figure 8.) Events are implemented
using Django’s multi-table inheritance, which means that there is a base table with
common event fields: associated account, dates, etc. Event types—subscription,
reimbursement, borrow, purchase—store information specific to that event in a
table, and each record is linked to a base event with the common event fields.
Subscriptions have a type or “category,” which is used to track the different
subscription plans, and a “subtype” used to distinguish new subscriptions, renewals,
supplements, and separate payments.

16

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 8. Database Diagram for Accounts Module

All events support partially known dates. Date precision is stored in flags alongside
the dates, and are used to calculate and display the date accurately based on the
known portion.13 (Initially, the Project only supported partially known dates for
borrowing events. But the Project team eventually discovered the importance of
supporting partially known dates for subscription events as well.) All events can be
linked to a work and optionally to an edition. These links are stored on the base event
because there are a few book-related events—gifts, requests, etc.—that do not fit the
other event types. In some cases, these irregular event types are documented in a
notes field.
People who are members of the lending library have associated accounts. The
relationship between people and accounts was implemented as a many-to-many
17

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

relationship based on the original database design. In practice, however, no member
should have more than one account. Accounts connect to addresses, which include
both street addresses and latitude and longitude coordinates. Accounts use footnotes
to link to bibliography records for the lending library cards. The bibliography
records may have associated International Image Interoperability Framework (IIIF)
manifests, if digital editions of the cards are available in that format and able to be
displayed.

4.5. Relational Database: Research
After the migration to a relational database, the Project team worked to augment and
refine the data about members, books, and events in the established fields. The
Project team also developed a set of conventions for identifying members and books,
and representing gaps, errors, and ambiguities in the archival sources.
Work on the lending library members developed on two fronts. First, the Project
team attempted to identify and “merge” members with multiple accounts. In the
logbooks, members appear each time they join the lending library, renew their
memberships, and receive a reimbursement. After the migration, these members
appeared multiple times in the database, associated with multiple accounts. To
decide whether members with the same name were, in fact, the same person, the
Project team developed a set of “merging guidelines.” Most basically: the team
merged accounts only if they belonged to members with the same name, and the
event in one account clearly fit an event in the other account. “Fit” describes
contiguous subscriptions and renewals, and subscriptions with deposits that match
reimbursements. Consider the case of “Miss Wilson.” The name appears in the
logbooks five times, associated with subscription events on November 9, 1923; April
10, 1926; August 20, 1927; September 7, 1927; and September 14, 1927. In the
database, Miss Wilson appeared five times as well, associated with five separate
accounts. The Project team inferred that at least two of these events belonged to the
same Miss Wilson: on August 20, 1927, she joined the lending library for one month,
paying a 100 francs deposit, and on September 14, 1927, she received a 100 francs
reimbursement. Accordingly, the team merged the two accounts. The team,
however, wasn’t certain about how the other events were connected, so kept them
separate. Consequently, there are now four Miss Wilsons in the database, instead of
18

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

five. (The Project would rather leave members unmerged than merge them
incorrectly.) The 1.2 data sets include 5,235 members. That number surely counts
some members multiple times. (For example, the four remaining Miss Wilsons may
in fact be the same member.) The Project invites researchers to help identify
members and suggest merges.
Second, the Project team developed naming guidelines to complement the gender
and nationality guidelines. Our aim was to provide the full name of each lending
library member as well as the name in the archival sources. Accordingly, the Project
represents Katherine Anne Porter as “Katherine Anne Porter” and “Mrs. Katherine
Anne Pressly,” and Claude Cahun as “Claude Cahun” and “Mlle Lucie Schwob.”
(See figure 9.) The Project also lists variant (and often incorrect) spellings of names
that appear in the sources. Lincoln Steffans, for example, is also listed as “Lincoln
Stephan”; and Marie Boscq is also listed as “Marie Bosq.”

Figure 9. Database Page for Katherine Anne Porter

Work on the books was even more complicated. The lending library cards list books
by title only. After the migration, the database was populated by thousands of titles
without author or publication information. Starting in 2018, the Project team worked
to match these titles to author names and dates of first publication. (The team used
dates of first publication because of the challenge of identifying the specific editions
that circulated in the lending library.) For books in English translation, the team used
the date of the book’s first publication in English. For books written before the

19

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

advent of the printing press—Plato’s Republic, Augustine’s Confessions—the team
left the publication date blank.
The Project team has identified ninety-two percent of the 6,020 items that circulated
in the lending library, according to the extant lending library cards. The remaining
eight percent are label “uncertain.” These uncertain books could not be adequately
identified for one of two reasons. Either the title was “generic”—that is, it could
refer to multiple books: for example, “Three Loves” and “Katherine Mansfield.”
(Beach and her assistants would often refer to biographies, and collected and
selected editions by their subject’s or author’s names.) Or the title cannot be matched
to any book: for example, “12:30 from Heaven,” which Darsie Rutherford Gillie
borrowed in 1937. Books labelled “uncertain” in the book data set connect to an
explanatory note in the notes field. For “12:30 from Heaven,” the note suggests that
the book might be Freeman Wills Crofts’s The 12:30 from Croydon (1934).
The Project team had to do other work with the books. For instance, the team
occasionally had to “demerge” and “merge” books. Due to the work with
OpenRefine during the TEI stage, some book titles were incorrectly matched in the
database and some still needed to be matched. For example, Gertrude Stein’s Three
Lives (1909) was incorrectly conflated with “Three Loves.” To demerge a book, the
team created a new book record and re-associated events from one record to the
other. To merge books, the team re-associated events and deleted the duplicate
record. A notes field in the database tracks this work, but it does not appear in the
data sets. (See figure 10.)

20

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 10. Database Page for Gertrude Stein’s Three Lives

As the Project team manually corrected book records, Koeser implemented and ran
a script to match the books with OCLC entries using the WorldCat Search API. If a
match was found to all the search criteria, she used it to update the record with an
OCLC Work URI, sample edition URI, format type, genres and subjects. In spite of
this effort, however, the OCLC data proved insufficiently reliable. (OCLC has
discontinued using Work URIs.) Thus, the Project only includes information
collected about format in the data sets, and much of this information had to be
corrected manually.
Finally, the Project team had to identify specific volumes and periodical issues, and,
when possible, add links to full text versions of books. To identify volumes and
periodical issues, the team used information on the lending library cards. For full
text versions, the team linked to versions available on the Internet Archive. In rare
cases, the team linked to other digital archives or specific digital editions. For
example, a link to the Blue Mountain Project provides a complete run of the journal
Broom (1921–1924).
Work on the events focused on the membership timelines of individual members. As
discussed in section 3.3, a member would occasionally renew a membership before
it was set to expire. Initially, the Project conflated purchase and start dates, resulting
in truncated membership timelines. To address this problem, the Project team
revised the database to differentiate between the two, and applied a data migration
21

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

to adjust start dates for renewals purchased before the previous membership period
expired. Consider the case of Frances and Morrill Cody, who were members between
1924 and 1926. (The Codys were married and shared an account.) The Codys joined
the lending library for six months on July 7, 1924, and then renewed for another six
months on November 11, 1924. In the database, the renewal has a purchase date of
November 11, 1924; a start date of January 7, 1925; and an expiration date of July
7, 1925. (See figure 11.) Members would also renew after their previous
membership expired. The Project team does not backdate the start dates of these
renewals unless there is clear evidence that Beach did so. As a result, some
membership timelines might be slightly too long.

Figure 11. Purchase and Start Date of a Renewal by Frances and Morrill Cody

Work refining and augmenting the data about members, books, and events is
ongoing. Between the first and third versions of the data sets, the Project team added
information from the address books—addresses, first names, events. The team also
improved and corrected hundreds of member and book records. Much of this work
was aided by visitors to the Project website. The credits page acknowledges their
assistance.

5. Data Sets
5.1. Members
The members data set includes information about 5,235 lending library members in
the following fields: member URI, member name, sort name, title, gender, individual
or organization, has lending library card, birth year, death year, membership years,

22

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

VIAF URL, Wikipedia URL, nationalities, addresses, postal codes, arrondissements,
longitude and latitude coordinates, notes, last updated.
Member names appear in two fields. “Member name” includes the member’s full
name and (if different) the name in the archival sources. The “sort name” is the
member’s full name, with the last name first to facilitate alphabetization. The “title”
field includes titles from the archival sources. At an early stage of the Project, the
Project team hypothesized that titles might be a clue to nationality: French titles
(Mlle, Mme, M.) for French members, and English titles (Miss, Mrs., Mr.) for nonFrench members. This hypothesis proved incorrect: the language of the titles—and
even the presence of titles—is largely arbitrary. Due to the way names from the
database appear on the Project website, the Project team does not include titles for
members who were also “creators.” If the team were to include titles for these
member-creators, the author of The Sun Also Rises (1926) would appear on the
Project website as Mr. Ernest Hemingway, instead of Ernest Hemingway. Titles
appear in the name and sort name fields of members without known first names or
first initials.
Of the 5,235 members, 564 have extant lending library cards. The information on
the cards facilitates identification. In version 1.2 of the data sets, the Project team
has been able to link 520 members to VIAF and 358 members to Wikipedia.
(Thirteen members have a Wikipedia page, but no VIAF number.) (See figure 12.)
Significant obstacles to identifying members include partial names, missing
addresses, and, most obviously, the fact that most members were not public figures.
(Shakespeare and Company was not only—or even primarily—a community of
writers and artists.) The Project team has not yet attempted to identify members
using public records.

23

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

Figure 12. Members with Known Values for Demographic and Informational Fields

To facilitate analysis without the events data set, the members data set includes the
years a member was active in the lending library. There are fifty-eight members with
no membership years in the data set. The archival sources for these members do not
include membership years, and the Project team has been unable to accurately date
their activities. Consider the case of Louis Aragon. He has one lending library card,
which indicates that he borrowed two books by Joyce on October 11. The card does
not include a year. The card is likely from 1921—Aragon first read installments of
Ulysses earlier that year—but the Project team has not yet been able to confirm the
date. 1920 is also a possibility. Or consider the case of Julia Wright, Richard
Wright’s daughter. As a child, in the late 1940s and early 1950s, she visited Beach’s
apartment with her father. A single card lists four books in her own handwriting and
includes the date, June 27. The Project team contacted Wright, but she could not
remember the exact year. (Wright is the only living member of the lending library.)
Other members without years derive from the address books, which do not always
include membership dates.
24

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

The data set includes member addresses. These addresses are all from Project
sources. The Project team corrected—but did not supplement—addresses using
secondary sources. Some addresses do not have latitude and longitude coordinates.
Many of these are hotels: Beach included the hotel name, but not a street address,
and the Project team has been unable to pinpoint a specific location.
The data set includes a notes field, which displays information about sources and
shared accounts. This information is displayed on the Project website as well. The
“updated” field includes a timestamp, which automatically updates when a member
record is modified. The timestamp does not update, however, when an event
associated with a member’s account is modified.
Between the 1.0 and 1.2 versions of the members data set, the Project team reduced
the total number of members 5,726 to 5,235 by merging records belonging to the
same members and removing mistaken records. The team also added 1,055
addresses from the sources. The database maintains a record of old identifiers after
member records are merged, but this information is not included in the members data
set.14 The status of a member from the previous data set who is no longer available
in the current version can always be determined by performing a HTTP GET request
on the member URI. If the response is a 301 Moved Permanently, then the member
record was merged with another member, and the new location is the new member
URI. If a 404 response is returned, then that member record was removed.

5.2. Books
The books data set includes information about 6,020 books in the following fields:
book URI, title, author, editor, translator, illustrator, introduction, photographer,
year of publication, format, uncertain, eBook URL, volumes/issues, notes, event
count, borrow count, purchase count, circulation years, last updated.
Ninety-two percent of the 6,020 items that circulated in the lending library were
books. Seven percent of the items do not have a format listed—these items have not
been adequately identified. The majority of the remaining items were periodicals.
Two photographs, one article, and one print also circulated. The Project team
25

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

identifies multivolume works published in the same year as one item—for example,
Thomas Mann’s two volume novel, Buddenbrooks (1901, translated 1924).
Periodicals also appear as one item. Multivolume works published over multiple
years appear as separate items—for example, the first twelve volumes of Dorothy
Richardson’s thirteen volume, Pilgrimage (1915–1967).
The books data set includes a Boolean field indicating whether an item can be
adequately identified—475 items, eight percent of the total, are marked as uncertain.
(Section 4.5 of this essay describes the difficulty of identifying items. Some items
marked as uncertain have identifiable formats—hence the discrepancy between the
eight percent of items marked as uncertain and the seven percent without a listed
format.) A “notes” field in the data set provides likely identifications. These notes
are also visible on the Project website.
The data set also includes 3,155 links to digital editions of the books that circulated
in the lending library. These links are available on the Project website and are
intended to encourage visitors to read the books that circulated in the lending library.
The links—most of which are to the Internet Archive—may have limited value as
data for computational analysis.
To facilitate analysis without requiring use of the events data set, the books data set
includes summary information about the events associated with each title: the total
number of events, total borrows and purchases, and a list of years that a book
circulated. The number of borrows can be used to reveal the most popular books and
other formats. Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man (1916) was the most
frequently borrowed book with fifty-six total borrows. Kotin and Koeser’s
“Shakespeare and Company: Top Ten Lists” (2020) gives an overview of the most
popular books and periodicals.15 As discussed in section 3.2 of this essay, researchers
are strongly encouraged to focus on borrowing events (as opposed to total events)
when analysing book data.
There are thirty-five books without circulation years in the data set. Each book only
has one event, and those events do not have known years. Like the members data
set, the books data set includes a timestamp which is automatically updated
whenever a book record is modified.
26

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Between versions 1.0 and 1.2 the books data set, the Project added nine books and
corrected numerous book records. Changes were often minor: adding the name of
the author of an introduction, correcting a date of publication. The books data set
only includes books (and other items) listed on extant lending library cards. The
Beach Papers, however, contain catalogs of lending library holdings, which include
items not listed on the cards. The Project may eventually use these catalogs to create
a more comprehensive database of lending library holdings.

5.3. Events
The events data set includes information about 35,523 lending library events in the
following fields: event type, start date, end date, member URI, member name, sort
name, subscription price, deposit amount, duration, duration in days, volume limit,
category, purchase date, reimbursement amount, book borrow status, borrow
duration in days, book purchase price, currency, item URI, title, volume, author, year
of publication, notes, source type, source citation, source manifest, source image.
The events data set includes high level information about members and books to
facilitate analysis without requiring use of the other data sets.
Every event has a type—either a subscription event type (subscription, renewal,
supplement, reimbursement, separate payment) or borrowing event type (borrow,
crossed out, generic, gift, periodical subscription, purchase, request.) Ninety-four
percent of all borrowing events are, in fact, borrows. The remaining six percent
involve other kinds of events, including events that are crossed out on the lending
library cards. (Occasionally, a member would decide to borrow a different book at
the last minute and Beach or one of her assistants would cross out the title listed on
the card.) Researchers are encouraged to examine the digital editions of the lending
library cards to learn about the range of “generic” events. “Separate payment” refers
to an uncommon event: a member visits Shakespeare and Company to complete a
payment initiated by an earlier subscription event. (For example, a member pays for
a subscription on one day and the subscription deposit on another.) Supplements are
usually payments to increase borrowing limits—for example from one volume at a
time to two. The Project lists the number of extra volumes paid for by a supplement
in the volume field. Occasionally, supplements extend subscriptions.
27

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

Every event has a start and end date, although one or both may be missing, and dates
that are present may be only partially known. Unknown dates are indicated by the
empty string in the start or end date field. Single-day events, such as purchases and
reimbursements, are represented by the same date in the start and end date. Other
events, such as subscriptions and borrowing events, have duration, and use different
dates to indicate the duration of the event when known. Event dates are in ISO 8601
format. The events data set includes 383 events with no date; 159 events with year
only; 494 events that only include year and month but no day; and 55 events with a
day and month but no year expressed as --MM-DD. In the 1.2 data sets, 290
reimbursements have partial or no dates, and no reimbursement amount. Information
about the vast majority of these reimbursements come from the address books, which
often simply indicate whether a member received a reimbursement or not, and do
not include a date.
Analyzing the number and distribution of events illuminates both the operations of
Shakespeare and Company and the completeness of the Beach Papers. The Beach
Papers include a greater proportion of lending library cards from the 1930s than the
1920s. As a result, the number of overall events in the data set reaches its peak in
1939. (See figure 13.) The small number of events after 1941 reflects the fact that
Beach continued to loan books after Shakespeare and Company closed.

Figure 13. Total Events by Year, 1919–1962

28

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Focusing on subscription events alone, however, reveals that Shakespeare and
Company had the greatest number of active members—249—in 1926, at the height
of the roaring 1920s. (See figure 14.) This discrepancy is due to the incompleteness
of the Project sources. The small number of members in 1942 reflects still active
subscriptions that were purchased in 1941.

Figure 14. Total Membership by Month and Year, 1919–1942

Every event is associated with one or two library members—two in the case of
shared accounts. (The Project includes 49 shared accounts.) Member information is
provided in three forms: a URI, for connecting the data set with the members data
set and for accessing the member page on the Project website; a display name; and
a sort name.
Subscriptions, renewals, and supplements have a “subscription price” and a
“subscription deposit.” Subscription reimbursements have a “reimbursement refund
amount.” Book purchases and periodical subscriptions have a “purchase price.” The
currency field indicates the currency of all payments. The vast majority of
transactions—99.95%—were in francs, with only a handful of transactions in British
pounds or US dollars. The Project includes the currency field to avoid introducing
errors via conversion. Missing amounts in these fields reflect missing amounts in the
Project’s sources.

29

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

Subscriptions and borrows include duration information when it can be calculated.
Duration is calculated as a relative delta between the start date and the end date,
including the start but not the end date in the total—or half each of the start and end
dates. Durations are only provided when both start and end dates are known or if
both start and end date have a known month and day but no year. In the latter case,
dates are assumed to be in the same or subsequent years. The data set also includes
a human-readable duration which is used on the Project website and in the
administrative interface. Researchers should use the day fields provided for
calculations. For completeness, however, the following explains the readable
duration: any duration less than twenty-eight days is expressed as weeks (for
multiples of seven) or days; for longer durations, timedelta between start and end
dates is expressed as a combination of years, months, and days.16
The events data set also includes information about the “volume limit” of
subscriptions (that is, the number of volumes included in the subscription); the
subscription category (or plan); and subscription purchase date, since purchase dates
and start dates may not be identical. Beach would occasionally allow members to
borrow more than their permitted number of volumes at one time. In the 1.2 datasets,
1,035 subscriptions and renewals do not indicate a volume limit. Plans range from
free memberships to “day-by-day” memberships to discounts for students, teachers,
and members of La Maison des Amis des Livres (abbreviated as AdL).17
A “borrow status” field indicates how each borrowing event ended, if known. The
field documents information provided on the lending library cards that might not
otherwise be apparent: if a borrowing event has no known end date, a book might
still have been returned, bought (thirteen events), or missing (four events). All
borrowing events with a known end date are also marked as returned. Of the 21,059
borrowing events in the data set, 613 (three percent) have an unknown status.
As of the 1.2 release of the data sets, all events include source information; these
fields may be plural, reflecting the fact that some events are documented in multiple
sources. (See figure 15.) Source information includes the type of source (lending
library cards, logbooks, address books); a citation for the particular item or, in the
case of the logbooks, group of items; and when possible, IIIF manifest and image
URLs, which provide a more specific location and access to the digital edition.
30

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Figure 15. Events by Source Type

The sources from the Beach Papers have been digitized by Princeton University
Library and made available using IIIF Presentation and IIIF Image APIs. The source
references for events from lending library cards held at Princeton have been linked
to the corresponding digital editions. On the Project website, source image
references display events with images of the relevant lending library card. The data
set includes the IIIF resources as a reference and to encourage researchers to analyze
the images alongside the data. The images will not likely be useful for handwriting
recognition, since considerable work has been done deciphering, sanitizing, and
standardizing the references on the cards.

6. Limitations, Potential, and Future Plans
The main limitation of the data sets is the incompleteness of the Project’s sources.
A secondary limitation is the Project’s scope. The Project focuses on the
Shakespeare and Company lending library, and thus do not provide a full portrait of
Beach’s bookshop or publishing activities. The financial information in the data sets
does not provide an account of the overall business of Shakespeare and Company.
31

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

Yet these limitations are minor in light of the Project’s potential. The fact that the
Project sources exist at all is a marvel. The American Library Association (ALA)
has long advised libraries to protect patron privacy by “purg[ing] circulation […]
records when they are no longer needed for library operations.”18 Shakespeare and
Company was not affiliated with the ALA, and Sylvia Beach did not take this advice.
She preserved individual member records, as well as more general circulation and
membership information. Her decision creates an array of research and outreach
opportunities at the intersection of modernist studies, digital humanities, and public
humanities.
The Shakespeare and Company Project data sets promise to address major questions
in modernist studies. The data sets illuminate the reading practices of individual
writers and artists, as well as the connections between and among them. For
example, researchers can discover what Stein read, and whether Stein and Joyce (or
Stein, Joyce, and Hemingway) read anything in common. In this way, the data sets
promise to support biographical research and critical studies of influence and
referentiality. The data sets also illuminate the lives of individual books. For
example, researchers can track the circulation of Ulysses or Virginia Woolf’s Mrs.
Dalloway (1925) or Havelock Ellis’s Studies in the Psychology of Sex (1897–1928).
Researchers can also use the data sets to track the circulation of particular books
around Paris—from address to address, neighborhood to neighborhood. The high
price of Ulysses—150 francs in 1922, about $200 today—made purchasing a copy
difficult for many potential readers. The data sets reveal a new readership for the
novel.
The data sets also promise to address more general questions in modernist studies.
How did the Lost Generation move around Paris between 1919 and 1941? How did
Anglophone and Francophone modernists interact? What was the relationship
between so-called “high-brow” and “middle-brow” culture? Did modernist classics
circulate with bestselling novels—and if so, how? Did members, for example, read
Woolf’s The Years (1937) and Margaret Mitchell’s Gone with the Wind (1936)
concurrently or sequentially? What were the most popular books and periodicals at
the lending library? Does the answer challenge how scholars and the general public
understand the modernist canon?
32

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

The data sets also allow scholars to address questions in literary theory. Does
borrowing duration reveal how certain books—and genres—were read? Does a
book’s circulation years reveal its “staying power”? Is there a connection between
proximity and taste, and between class and taste? Researchers could begin to address
these questions about taste by examining whether lending library members in the
same arrondissement were more likely to borrow the same books than members in
different arrondissements. Did men and women read different books? Did men and
women have different canons? What about different age groups and nationalities?
Can different networks of lending library members illuminate the nature of artistic
communities or the power of personal recommendations? Can the reading practices
of different communities contribute to the history and theory of reading? Can the
circulation of the most popular (and unpopular) books at the lending library
contribute to theories of innovation and influence? The questions are endless!
The data sets also create opportunities to test new methods for working with partial
information. Archives are almost always incomplete. The complementarity of the
Project sources, however, provides a clear picture of what the Beach Papers are
missing. Time series forecasting and backcasting could be used to compensate for
gaps. Analyzing borrowing behavior against subscription limits, for example, might
make it possible to calculate the lending library’s “borrowing capacity,” which
might, in turn, help estimate the scale of undocumented borrowing activity. Indeed,
a combination of network community detection and feature analysis of full-text
works might make it possible to model what members without extant cards read.
Such speculative approaches to archival gaps and “silences” are an important area
of research.
Finally, the data sets promise to connect communities: scholars of modernism and
data scientists, and these overlapping communities with a wider non-academic
public. The Lost Generation holds a prominent position in the popular imagination.
The exploits of Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald, the lesbian communities on the
Left Bank, the salons and cafes of Montparnasse—all serve as material for popular
books and movies. The data sets promise to fuel this work, revealing new stories and
new histories. A single address can inspire a television mini-series. Consider, for
example, Reid Hall at 4 rue de Chevreuse on the Left Bank—the data sets reveal that
33

SHAKESPEARE AND COMPANY PROJ ECT DATA SETS

twenty-three different members of Shakespeare and Company lived there. This fact,
once recognized, is unsurprising: Reid Hall was a center for American women
studying in Paris. Yet the fact is still compelling: twenty-three lives, twenty-three
stories—all connected by Shakespeare and Company, which was a twenty-minute
walk away through the Luxembourg Gardens. The Project generates thousands of
such stories.
In the future, the Project team plans to release address and creator exports to
facilitate further research. The creator export will allow for demographic analysis
based on creators of the books that circulated in the lending library. (All the creators
are associated with VIAF numbers, which can be used to identify birth and death
dates, gender, and nationality.) In the long term, the Project is considering
integrating information from other sources in the Beach Papers—for example, book
inventories and information about purchases of Ulysses. But those decisions depend
on how the current data sets are used and the feedback we receive from the Project’s
overlapping communities. In 2022, Kotin and Koeser plan to edit a special feature,
“The World of Shakespeare and Company,” in collaboration with the Journal of
Cultural Analytics and Modernism/modernity, with contributions from scholars from
these overlapping communities.

Notes
1

Would Beach have used a computer if she had had access to one? Not likely. In her memoir, Shakespeare and
Company (1959), Beach describes how she managed the lending library: “My lending library was run on what
Adrienne [Monnier] called, though I never knew why, ‘le plan américain.’ It would have horrified an American
librarian, with her catalogues and card indexes and mechanical appliances. It was quite suitable for a library such as
mine. There was no catalogue—I preferred to let people find out for themselves how much was lacking; no card
index—so unless you could remember, as Adrienne, with her wonderful memory, was able to do, to whom all your
books were lent, you had to look through all the members’ cards to find out what had become of a volume.” See
Sylvia Beach, Shakespeare and Company (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1991), 21.
For more information about Shakespeare and Company as a publisher, see Joshua Kotin, “Shakespeare and
Company: Publisher,” in Publishing Modernist Fiction and Poetry, edited by Lise Jaillant (Edinburgh: Edinburgh
UP, 2019), 109–134.
2

3

To learn more about Beach and Shakespeare and Company, see Noel Riley Fitch, Sylvia Beach and the Lost
Generation: A History of Literary Paris in the Twenties and Thirties (New York: Norton, 1983); and Sylvia Beach,
The Letters of Sylvia Beach, edited by Keri Walsh (New York: Columbia University Press, 2011).

34

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

4

The current English-language bookshop in Paris named Shakespeare and Company was opened in 1951 by George
Whitman. The bookshop was originally named Le Mistral. Whitman changed the name to Shakespeare and
Company in 1964 to honor Beach.
For a more detailed account of how the lending library worked, see Joshua Kotin, “Becoming a Member of the
Shakespeare and Company Lending Library,” Shakespeare and Company Project (Princeton: Center for Digital
Humanities, 2020).
5

6

All the numbers in this article are from Joshua Kotin and Rebecca Sutton Koeser et al, Shakespeare and Company
Project Dataset: Lending Library Members, Books, Events, version 1.2 (Princeton: Dataspace, Princeton
University), doi.org/10.34770/dtqa-2981.
For more information about the acquisition of the Beach Papers, see Howard C. Rice, Jr., “The Sylvia Beach
Collection,” The Princeton University Library Chronicle 26.1 (1964): 7–13.
7

8

Box forty-three in the Beach Papers includes notes and other ephemera in addition to the cards. The Project has
connected all the material in box forty-three to specific members. The one exception is a small notebook detailing
sales of Havelock Ellis’s seven-volume Studies in the Psychology of Sex (1897–1928). The Project links to a digital
edition of the notebook, but does not associate it with a lending library member or include it in the data sets.
For an account of the gaps in the logbook coverage, see Joshua Kotin and Rebecca Sutton Koeser, “The
Shakespeare and Company Lending Library Cards in Context,” The Shakespeare and Company Project (Princeton:
Center for Digital Humanities, 2020).
9

See Nick Budak, “Representing Gender in the Shakespeare and Company Project,” Shakespeare and Company
Project (Princeton: Center for Digital Humanities, 2019).
10

11

For more information about the transition from TEI to a relational database, see Rebecca Sutton Koeser et al.,
“Documents to Data: The Evolution of Approaches to a Library Archive,” Poster, ACH2019 (July 24, 2019),
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3277320.
12

The Project only includes information about the specific edition (or printings) of one book: Ulysses. In general,
the lending library cards do not include information about specific editions. Both American and British editions of
books circulated in the lending library.
13

For implementation details, see Rebecca Sutton Koeser, Nick Budak, Gissoo Doroudian, Xinyi Li, Benjamin
Hicks, and Kevin McElwee, “Princeton-CDH/mep-django: V1.4,” Zenodo, January 22, 2021,
doi:10.5281/zenodo.4458099.
14

Versions of the members data set after 1.0 include a supplemental file with information about members merged,
renamed, and deleted since previous versions.
See Joshua Kotin and Rebecca Sutton Koeser, “Shakespeare and Company: Top Ten Lists,” Shakespeare and
Company Project (Princeton: Center for Digital Humanities, 2020),.
15

16

Calculations are made using the relativedelta module of the python-dateutil library.

For more information about various plans or subscription categories, see “What Are the Lending Library Plans?”
Shakespeare and Company Project (Princeton: Center for Digital Humanities, 2020).
17

18

“Library Privacy Checklist 1: Overview,” American Library Association (January 31, 2017).

35

