Journal of
Cultural Analytics

February 26, 2022

Cultures of E/valuation on the Social
Web. A very short introduction to the
special issue
Berenike Herrmann, Noah Bubenhofer, Daniel Knuchel, Simone Rebora, Thomas
Messerli
Berenike Herrmann, University of Bielefeld
Thomas Messerli, University of Basel, Switzerland
Noah Bubenhofer, Daniel Knuchel, University of Zurich, Switzerland
Simone Rebora, University of Verona, Italy
Article DOI: https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.33086

The Social Web is a network of people and platforms, of performances and products;
of reactions, opinions, judgments, and comparisons; of emotions, valuations, and
affects; of evaluations, ratings, and rankings. Shared and connective practices lead
to emergent, fluid, and sometimes quite stable, cultures of valuation and evaluation,
managing issues of identity, world view, and social participation.
In the late fall of 2020, the conference Digital Practices,1 virtually held in Basel
(CH), asked about such cultures and issues, focusing on practices of reading, writing,
and evaluation on the social web. Following up on that conversation, and zooming
in on evaluation practices, we are glad to now introduce a special issue of the Journal
of Cultural Analytics entitled “Cultures of evaluation on the social web”.
The aim of the special issue is to present theory-conscious studies of selected facets
of digital cultures of evaluation across a broad range of discourses on the social web.
At the same time, bringing together papers from linguistics, literary studies, and
digital humanities, it is our aim to take stock of common denominators, but also
differences, in method and theory, instilling discussion for a cross-disciplinary datadriven and data-intensive inquiry of valuation and evaluation within “data
humanities”.2 The types of discourse covered will include online lay book reviews
on platforms such as Goodreads and LovelyBooks, as well as reviews of non-literary
“products“ such as cooking recipes, restaurant reviews, and concerts.

Journal of Cultural Analytics 7.2 (2022): 1-3. https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.33086

A V E R Y S H O R T I N T R O D U C T I O N T O T H E SP E C I A L I S S UE

Drawing from a timely and diverse cross-disciplinary array of theoretical
frameworks of “valuation” and “evaluation” from disciplines such as linguistics,
literary studies, and data science, the bulk of the papers collected in the special issue
will address their specific research topic through an interaction between theoretical
modeling and real-world data.
Together, the collected contributions will offer a diverse picture of today’s valuation
and evaluation cultures on the (social) web. Each paper will examine a different
aspect of how value is attributed and negotiated by thousands of people on the web,
the discourse being typically mediated by an ordinal scale of votes and unfolding
within the limits of a platform or forum.
The theoretical frameworks will document a wide scope of approaches on
“valuation” and “evaluation”—covering aesthetic and Bakhtinian perspectives from
literary studies,3 pragmatic, usage-based, corpus-linguistic/corpus pragmatic4 and
sociolinguistic approaches from linguistics,5 and approaches from data science that
address evaluation apparently “theory-lessly”.6
“Cultures of evaluation on the social web” will take the form of a rolling issue, with
new contributions published regularly in the Journal of Cultural Analytics, starting
from “Between consumers and fans. Writing fan reports as a multifunctional
evaluation practice” by Simon Meier-Vieracker, published together with this
introductory piece.
In addition, an overview paper (co-authored by the editors of the special issue) will
map the current field from an interdisciplinary “data-humanities” angle and discuss
potential future developments. There, the editors will address the issue of
“valuation” and “evaluation” on the web in its heterogeneity as portrayed by the
papers, but, importantly, they will assume a synthetic vantage point: highlighting the
common denominators, methodological linchpins, and shared open questions of a
“data humanities”.

2

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Notes
1

https://digitalpractices2020.philhist.unibas.ch/en/

2

https://culturalanalytics.org/post/1210-mind-the-agent

von Heydebrand and Winko, “The Qualities of Literatures. A Concept of Literary Evaluation in Pluralistic
Societies.”
3

4

Spitzmüller, Flubacher, and Bendl, “Soziale Positionierung: Praxis und Praktik. Einführung in Das Themenheft.”

5

Gee, “Semiotic Social Spaces and Affinity Spaces. From The Age of Mythology to Today’s Schools.”

6

Knoop et al., “Mapping the Aesthetic Space of Literature ‘from Below.’”

3

