Journal of
Cultural Analytics

March 10, 2022

Between consumers and fans: Writing
fan reports as a multifunctional
evaluation practice
Simon Meier-Vieracker
Simon Meier-Vieracker, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany
Peer-Reviewer: Jannis Androutsopoulos
Dataverse DOI: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/GMKLV4
Article DOI: https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.33570

ABSTRACT
Based on a corpus of approx. 360,000 “fan reports”, that is online concert reviews written by
customers of a ticket agency, this paper analyses lexical and stylistic features of evaluative
language and their social functions as means for (self-)positioning. The analysis shows that the
reviews are oriented towards different and competing orders of value and their writers take
different roles. While some writers act as enthusiastic fans that use the platform for building
communities of shared feelings, other writers appear as consumers who judge primarily
according to economic criteria. On the basis of concrete patterns of language use it is shown how
the heterarchic plurality of evaluative standards is used as a resource for social demarcations.

1. Introduction
On the website of the leading German ticket agency Eventim, concert reviews
written by customers can be found under the heading “Fan-Reports: Bewertungen
und Rezensionen” (fan reports: ratings and reviews). A prototypical “fan report”, in
this case on a Justin Bieber concert, goes like this:
Der Hammer !!!

Köln, LANXESS arena, 18.09.2016 *****

Das Konzert war einfach so toll! Ich war schon am 17.9 morgens da um auch wirklich sicher zu stellen
das ich in die erste Reihe komme und es hat geklappt! Die Atmosphäre war einfach so krass und ich
würde alles dafür geben diesen Tag nochmal zu wiederholen! Justin war so Hammer und die fans haben
auch richtig Stimmung gemacht.Alles in allem : Perfekt !
Awesome !!!
The concert was just so great! I was already there on 17.9. in the morning to make sure that I got into
the first row and it worked! The atmosphere was just so unreal and I would give anything to repeat this
day! Justin was so awesome and the fans really set the mood, all in all: Perfect!1

Journal of Cultural Analytics 7.2 (2022): 4-31

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

The person who wrote this review is obviously a big Justin Bieber fan. She spares
no effort to get as close as possible to her beloved star, and she even identifies herself
as a fan in her report. Looking back on the concert, she is overtly expressing her
enthusiasm, albeit in a rather clichéd way by phrases like would give anything to
repeat this day, but also through repeated use of the intensity marker so (so great,
so unreal, so awesome).2 Moreover, she positions herself within the group of fans
who share the same experience of – as she puts it – ‘having set the mood’ and who
have played their part in the constitution of this emotionally thrilling event.3 By
writing about her concert experience in such an enthusiastic manner, she seems to
affiliate with all those readers who will share her enthusiasm, thus positioning
herself once again in the fan community. At the same time, the person acts as a
costumer of the ticket agency who is rating the quality of the sold product and makes
use of the widespread and standardized valorization technique of awarding a number
of stars ranging from one to five.4 Significantly, however, the reviews, which every
customer of Eventim (as long as the ticket was bought online) is asked to write, are
called “Fan-Reports”, framing the reviewing process as a practice of fandom rather
than mere consumption.
In this paper, I will have a closer look at this multifunctional nature of fan reports as
online evaluation practices. Based on a corpus of approx. 360,000 fan reports and
using corpus linguistic and data-driven methods, I will analyse lexical and stylistic
features of evaluative language which underpin the textual admiration practices of
fans as well as the product rating practices of consumers. Based on theoretical
accounts of evaluation and positioning through language from both linguistics and
sociology, I will show how both types of evaluation are intertwined in this genre and
its discursive contexts.
My analysis of evaluation in fan reports brings together two strands of research.
First, it contributes to the study of online reviews from a linguistic perspective,
which has often drawn attention to the central role of evaluative practices in this
genre and has produced valuable insights into linguistic means of evaluation in
discourse.5 However, most of the studies examining discourse features of evaluation
beyond star ratings use qualitative methods based on small datasets. In contrast,
computational linguistic approaches to the analysis of large datasets like sentiment
analysis are mostly oriented to the task of automated detection of mood and
5

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

consumer preferences6 and tend to abstract from the discursive aspects of evaluative
language. I will therefore base my analysis on a large amount of data and at the same
time conduct a discourse-oriented analysis which will cover discursive functions of
evaluation like audience design and (self-)positioning.
Second, the particular type of online reviews analysed here contributes to the study
of fandom and fan communication, which has become a vibrant branch in sociology
and linguistics.7 Analysing fandom through the lens of fan writings is a common
approach here. As the cultural theorist John Fiske has argued, semiotic productivity
and text production are important and constitutive aspects of fandom and fan
communities:
All popular audiences engage in varying degrees of semiotic productivity, producing meanings and
pleasures that pertain to their social situation out of the products of the culture industries. But fans often
turn this semiotic productivity into some form of textual production that can circulate among – and thus
help to define – the fan community.8

Thus, genres like fanzines, fan fictions and, more recently, internet forums have
always been valuable resources for fan research.9 As opposed to professional
reviews e.g. by journalists,10 fans’ reviews, which can be found in large numbers on
various platforms on the internet, represent a distinct type of expertise which also
differs in the criteria of evaluation.11 Most research on fans’ textual products,
however, also prefers qualitative methods for the analysis of rather small data sets.
By contrast, I will show how corpus linguistic methods allows to work with much
more data and to focus on more comprehensive patterns of evaluative language use.
Moreover, the special case of fan reports may reveal how the fans’ evaluation
practices are entangled with economic aspects and processes of commodification.
This will shed light on how fans make “their culture out of the commercial
commodities […] of the cultural industries”12 and how they use the commercial
platforms as resources for building up communities of shared feelings.13
In the following, I will first outline the theoretical framework of my analysis (sec.
2) and then present the data set and methods (sec. 3). Starting with a data-driven
analysis (sec. 4), I will interpret the findings against the backdrop of some theoretical
considerations on the social functions of evaluation practices: First, I will discuss
audience design by language style and forms of address (sec. 5), second, I will
6

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

elaborate on acts of positioning (sec. 6). In the conclusion, I will discuss some
implications for the constitution of fandom and fan cultures at the interface of
subcultural practice and commodification (sec. 7).

2. Theoretical framework: Evaluation in (digital) discourse
My analysis takes a data-driven approach to the analysis of evaluation in discourse.14
Instead of looking for the distribution of certain linguistic markers of evaluation as
derived from theory, I will rather seek to develop the analytical categories
inductively from the data itself. However, my analysis moves within a framework
of previous theoretical approaches to evaluation in general and in the field of digital
media in particular.
Generally speaking, linguistic evaluation encompasses all instances of language use
that are capable of taking a positive or negative stance on a person, situation or other
entity, thereby assigning a certain value to that entity from a subjective, but possibly
socially shared point of view.15 While the primary function of evaluation is to
express attitude, it also may construe social relationships between participants of
communication as it serves as a rhetorical means for aligning with readers’/listeners’
evaluative stances and will activate them to supply their assessments.16 This is also
what Systemic Functional Linguistics or Appraisal Theory, one of the most
comprehensively theorized models of evaluative language, aims at when it assigns
evaluations to the domain of interpersonal meaning.17
A somewhat different approach which still seeks to cover both the attitudinal and
the interpersonal function of evaluation is positioning theory as introduced by
Davies & Harré18 and further developed in linguistics by John Du Bois.19 According
to his seminal stance triangle model, stance taking is conceptualized as an interactive
process of two subjects evaluating an object, thereby positioning themselves and
thereby aligning with each other, be it converging in their evaluative judgements or
diverging.20 From a linguistic perspective, this alignment in terms of shared feelings
and opinions will rely on the adaption not only of attitudes but also of lexical as well
as stylistic, e.g. graphemic means, particularly since text-based computer-mediated
communication offers a broad range of stylistic alternatives which function as cues
of positioning.21 Based on the assumption that the writers of fan reports position
7

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

themselves and others both as consumers and as fans, it is to be expected that this
will be reflected in differences in language style and in forms of address as a means
of audience design.22
From a cultural analytic point of view in particular, it becomes clear that in this
theoretical framework, evaluation is based on but not limited to individual cognitive
judgements and emotional assessments. As evaluation represents a social and
cultural process of establishing value, it includes both categorization based on
negotiable intersubjective criteria and its legitimation within or towards social
groups.23 Moreover, it is shaped by the available technological valuation
infrastructures (in the case of fan reports the digital writing environment with its
affordance to supplement the reviews with numerical ratings).24 These aspects are in
the focus of the sociology of evaluation, which can therefore complement the
linguistic approaches well.25 In the following, I will thus ask how the evaluation
practice of writing digital fan reports with its characteristic linguistic features
reflects a ‘heterarchic’ plurality of matrices against which the evaluated entities are
compared26, and how this nexus of different “orders of worth”27 points to the
constitution of fandom and fan culture in times of commodification.

3. Data and methods
The corpus of this study consists of 361,957 fan reports on live events of 11,491
different artists that were published between 2000 and 2017. Most of the reports are
about rock and pop concerts, occasionally football matches or theater and comedy
performances are also reviewed. For the sake of simplicity, I will generally speak of
concerts in the following.
The corpus was compiled in February 2018 when the website was still completely
HTML-based and could be easily scraped. For the corpus compilation, the texts were
downloaded together with some metadata (i.e. artist, location, date, year, rating) and
were processed as XML files. The corpus was lemmatized and part-of-speech tagged
with the standard software TreeTagger.28 After tokenization, the corpus contains
27,767,429 tokens. For the analysis, the corpus was imported to the software IMS
Open Corpus Workbench29 and its web-based derivation CQPweb. 30 This software
offers a variety of methods for linguistic analysis, next to a flexible, regular
8

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

expression-based syntax for corpus queries. Statistical methods such as keyword and
collocation analyses are also available.31
In this paper, I will use the ratings as metadata to group the texts and do contrastive
analyses. Table 1 shows the distribution of the ratings which fits to the well-known
J-shaped distribution of online reviews.32
Rating
*****
****
***

No. of texts
255,211 (70%)
47,839 (13%)
21,995 (6%)

No. of tokens
17,394,917
3,855,732
2,267,565

**

20,026 (5%)

1,939,660

*
16,886 (6%)
Table 1: Distribution of reviews by ratings

2,309,555

Most people seem to be happy with the sold product. This might be seen as a hint
that most of the writers are indeed affectively committed to the rated artists. It does
not mean, however, that the majority of the concertgoers are happy with the concert
performance itself.
The length of the reviews ranges from 6 to 501 tokens (mean = 74.6, median = 56).
When grouped by their ratings, it shows that reviews with higher ratings tend to be
shorter (cf. Table 2). This points to a tendency known from conversation analysis as
the notion of preference, which states that criticism as a dispreferred action must be
justified in more detail.33
Rating

Mean

Median

*****

68.2

51

****

80.6

60

***

103.1

79

**

96.9

89

*

136.8

89

Table 2: No. of tokens per text (i.e. text length) grouped by ratings.

The most reviewed artist is the German comedian Mario Barth with 3,992 reviews,
followed by the pop singer Helene Fischer (3,813 reviews) and the pop band
Unheilig (3,336 reviews). The most reviewed international artist is Pink (2,589

9

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

reviews). 3,362 different artists (29%) received at least 10 reviews, 675 (6%) at least
100.
In what follows, I will start with corpus linguistic, data-driven findings concerning
patterns of evaluative language derived from the whole dataset. Afterwards, I will
further enrich these findings by focussing on selected aspects that are particularly
meaningful for the research question on the entanglement of fandom and
consumption.

4. Corpus linguistic findings: Patterns of evaluative language
use
4.1. Keywords
To get an impression of the linguistic means of evaluation in the genre of fan reports,
a keyword analysis is a useful first step. Keywords are words whose frequencies in
a target corpus differ significantly from their frequencies in a reference corpus and
are thus in some extent crucial to the target corpus.34 For this study, five subcorpora
were built from the texts of the different ratings that were contrasted with the whole
corpus in order to find typical formulations for the different ratings.35 The keywords
were calculated with lemmas instead of word forms, the statistical measure was Log
Likelihood Ratio (LLR). The keyword analysis can be replicated with the code and
data in the Dataverse repository.
Rating
*****

****

Keywords
!, einfach, super, wieder, toll, Hammer, genial, geil, jede, und, Konzert, Abend,
immer, nah [nächste], absolut, dabei, begeistern, empfehlen, live, Wahnsinn,
unvergesslich, perfekt, Erlebnis, Dank, klasse, unglaublich, Stimmung, er,
fantastisch
!, simply, super, again, great, awesome, brilliant, genious, every, and, concert,
evening, always, close [next], absolutely, there, enthusiastic, recommend, live,
insane, unforgettable, perfect, experience, thank, great, unbelievable,
atmosphere, he, fantastic
etwas, aber, sehr, leider, gut, allerdings, schön, Abzug, trotzdem, ansonsten,
Stern, einzig, die, gefallen, kurz, finden, gelungen, Platz, ., insgesamt, Manko,
dennoch, jedoch, wenige, (, klein, Kritikpunkt, laut, Parkplatz, doch
bit, but, very, unfortunately, good, however, nice, deduction, nonetheless,
besides, star, alone, the, enjoy, short, find, successful, place, all in all,
shortcoming, nevertheless, but, few, (, small, criticism, loud, parking lot, but

10

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

***

**

*

leider, aber, nicht, schlecht, die, allerdings, etwas, mehr, schade, wenige,
jedoch, doch, ok, Platz, dann, kurz, eher, gut, zu, fehlen, erwarten, Preis,
teilweise, laut, Uhr, teuer, nett, finden, Stunde, insgesamt
unfortunately, but, not, bad, the, however, bit, more, pity, few, but, okay, place,
then, short, rather, good, too, lack, expect, price, partly, loud, o’clock,
expensive, nice, find, hour, all in all
nicht, schlecht, leider, schade, enttäuschend, enttäuscht, mehr, die, ?, keine,
eher, dann, aber, mittelmäßig, erwarten, Geld, wenige, Enttäuschung, Euro,
teuer, zu, Naja, Preis, um, viel, enttäuschen, laut, nichts, Stunde, schwach
not, bad, unfortunately, pity, disappointing, more, the, ?, no, rather, then, but,
mediocre, exptect, money, few, disappointment, Euro, expensive, much,
disappoint, loud, nothing, hour, weak
schlecht, Geld, nicht, enttäuschend, Enttäuschung, keine, ?, enttäuscht,
verlassen, schade, nie, nichts, dann, Frechheit, Reinfall, um, wir, Euro, leider,
die, langweilig, enttäuschen, mehr, Pause, gar, überhaupt, laut, völlig, teuer,
peinlich
bad, money, not, disappointing, disappointment, no, ?, disappointed, leave, pity,
never, nothing, then, outrage, flop, about, we, Euro, unfortunately, the, boring,
disappoint, more, break, completely, loud, absolutely, expensive, embarrassing

Table 3: Keywords

First, the keyword table shows the standards of assessment, i.e. the presupposed
norms and expectancies against which the writers evaluate the concert performance
and their concert experience respectively.36 In the highest rating, positive adjectives
with purely attitudinal meaning like super, toll (great), geil (awesome) and perfekt
clearly prevail, but nouns like Stimmung (atmosphere), Erlebnis (experience) and
also Gänsehaut (goosebumps, rank 46 of the keyword list) point to emotional aspects
as the crucial evaluation criteria for the events; people obviously go to concerts
because they want to be emotionally touched. Moreover, the adverb immer (always)
which is mainly used in the phrase wie immer (as always) shows that people often
attend several concerts by the same artist. They have acquired concert experience
and use it as a resource for evaluation. In the lower ratings of four and three stars,
the keyword kurz (short) points to the more concrete expectation that concerts should
not last too short (1), while Platz (place or seat) indicates that the quality of the
concert experience is related to the taken seats (2). In both examples, these
judgements are clearly separated from the quality of the artists’ performance itself.
(1) Einziger minus punkt: haben ein kleines bisschen zu kurz gespielt. Sonst wirklich ein sehr, sehr
gutes Konzert! (****)

11

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

The only minus point: they played a little bit too short. Apart from that, really a very, very good
concert!
(2) Tabaluga Konzert und Künstler Top. Halle an unseren Plätzen viel zu warm und z.T. schlechte
Akustik. (****)
Tabaluga concert and artist were top. The hall was much too warm at our seats and partly bad
acoustics.

From the ratings of three stars downwards, keywords appear that point to monetary
aspects like Preis (price), Geld (money), teuer (expensive) and Euro, mostly by the
claim that the concerts were too expensive for the quality offered:
(3) Kurzum wir waren enttäuscht und würden nicht noch einmal gehen, dafür sind die Karten zu teuer.
(***)
In short, we were disappointed and would not go again, the tickets are too expensive for that.
(4) sehr kurz viel zu wenig fürs Geld bei mäßiger Akustik. (***)
Very short, far too little for the money with mediocre acoustics.

The lowest ratings of one and two stars naturally include purely negative adjectives
like schlecht (bad), but also more descriptive adjectives like laut (loud) and
langweilig (boring) which again point to more concrete expectations towards the
concerts. Moreover, different lexemes from the semantic field of disappointment
(Enttäuschung, enttäuschen, enttäuschend) are typical for the lower ratings,
indicating the consumers’ higher expectations that were not fulfilled by the concerts.
Expressives like the stance adverb leider (unfortunately)37 and schade (pity) as
expressions of regret point in the same direction. In the lowest rating of one star, the
emotional response of disappointment and regret is even surpassed by
embarressment (peinlich) and indignation (Frechheit, outrage) which seems to put
the blame more on the side of the artists:
(5) So hatt die Dame bei einigen Liedern z.B. Noch die Mundharmonika im Mund, während der Gesang
schon weiterging. Und das finde ich für einen Weltstar wie Shakira einfach nur peinlich! (*)
In some songs, for example, the lady still had the harmonica in her mouth while the singing
continued. And I think that's just embarrassing for a world star like Shakira!
(6) Das Konzert in Köln war kurz gesagt, einfach nur eine frechheit! Weniger als eine Stunde gespielt,
und dafür sind leute über 300 km angereist! (*)

12

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

The concert in Cologne was, in short, just an outrage! Less than an hour played, and people
travelled over 300 km for that!

In addition to these evaluative means, the keyword table also shows lexical items
used to scale or graduate the evaluative judgements.38 In the extremes of one and
five stars we find intensifiers like absolut (absolutely), überhaupt and völlig
(completely), but also indefinite pronouns expressing completeness like jede (every)
and nichts (nothing). In the mid-range ratings, graduating lexical items like etwas
(bit) or teilweise (partially) can be found, allowing writers to mediate between praise
and criticism. This also holds true for adversative conjunctions like aber, jedoch
(but) and allerdings (however) which are typical for the mid-range ratings, too:
(7) Das Event war sehr schön, aber leider nur für die Ohren. Der Sitzplatz war Block 01 und die
Scheinwerfer waren ständig im Gesicht, so daß man nicht viel gesehen hatte. (***)
The event was very nice, but unfortunately only for the ears. The seat was block 01 and the spotlights
were constantly in your face, so you didn't see much.

Still another finding is noteworthy: In the five-star ratings, exclamation marks are
significantly frequent, emphasizing the expressiveness of the evaluations:
(8) Tolle Musiker, Solisten, Tänzer, die Promi-Darsteller, tolles Bühnenbild, bzw. die ganze Halle war
ja eine einzige Bühne - Wahnsinn!! (*****)
Great musicians, soloists, dancers, the celebrity performers, great stage design, or rather the whole
hall was a single stage - awesome!!

In the lower ratings of one and two stars, however, question marks are frequent,
mostly used in (rhetorical) questions that express consternation about the bad quality
of the concert and function as indirect accusations:39
(9) […] katastrophale Klangqualität, eine Klangsuppe, Bass und Schlagzeug überbetont, Gesang und
Gitarre (auch bei Soli) kaum zu hören - saß da überhaupt jemand am Mischpult? (*)
Catastrophic sound quality, a sound soup, bass and drums overemphasised, vocals and guitar (even
during solos) barely audible - was there anyone at the mixing desk at all?

13

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

4.2. Distribution of lexical items
The findings from the keyword analysis can be supplemented by visualizing the
distributions of selected lexical items. As Fig. 1 shows, aber (but) and leider
(unfortunately) share a similar distribution with their highest frequencies in the midrange ratings.40 Fig. 2 shows that exclamation marks are more frequent in both the
extremes. While writers of mid-range ratings try to balance positive and negative
evaluations, writers of one-star ratings just seem to be angry. Finally, Fig. 3 shows
that financial aspects are mentioned more frequently in the lower ratings.

Fig. 1: Distribution of aber and leider

14

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Fig. 2: Distribution of punctuation marks

Fig. 3: Distribution of Euro/€ and Geld

4.3. Key-trigrams
The keyword analysis can be expanded by moving to key-ngrams (in this case: keytrigrams).41 Like the keywords, the key-ngrams were calculated with lemmas using
the statistical measure Log Likelihood. This analysis, too, can be replicated with the
data and code in the Dataverse repository. Table 4 shows selected results with the
most frequent word form instantiations:
15

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

Rating
*****

Key-trigrams
es war ein; war einfach nur; auf jeden Fall; war der Hammer; das beste Konzert;
freue mich schon
it was a; was simply; in every case; just awesome; the best concert; looking
forward to

****

leider war die; sehr gut gefallen; alles in allem; ein Stern Abzug; ein schöner
Abend; nicht so gut
unfortunately it was, liked it very much, all in all, one star off, a nice evening, not
that good

***

leider war die; gut, aber; nur 3 Sterne; an sich war; nicht so gut; für den Preis
unfortunately it was; good, but; only 3 stars; in itself it was; not that good; for
that price
viel zu laut; gut, aber; mir mehr erwartet; für den Preis; war viel zu; auf der
Bühne
much too loud; good, but; exptected more; for that price; was much too; on stage

**

*

schade um das; in der Pause; Geld nicht wert; nicht zu empfehlen; war sehr
enttäuscht; viel zu laut
a pity about the; in the break; not worth the money, not recommended; was very
disappointed; much too loud

Table 4: Key-trigrams

Whereas exclamative constructions like war einfach nur {toll/super/genial} (was
simply {great/super/brilliant}) prevail in the five-star ratings, financial aspects come
to the fore in the lower ratings. Again, for the mid-range ratings a balancing of praise
and critique can be found, e.g. with the adversative construction gut, aber (good,
gut) or with the focus marker an sich (itself) which allows to separate the quality of
the performance from surrounding factors:
(10) Das Konzert an sich war spitze, nur unsere Sitzplätze waren leider schlecht. (***)
The concert itself was great, but our seats were bad.

As in (10), writers often comment on this with expressions of regret (leider war die,
unfortunately it was) and with references to unfulfilled expectations (mir mehr
erwartet, expected more). Finally, the trigram freue mich schon (looking forward to)
points to the desire for repetition of the concert experience, which is indeed typical
for fans, as it has already been shown for the review of the Justin Bieber fan quoted

16

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

in the introduction. This desire for repetition finds its counterpart in the caution notes
with the set phrase nicht zu empfehlen (not recommended) in the one-star ratings, by
which writers warn others not to make the same mistake as themselves.

5. Audience design by language style and forms of address
The data-driven analysis has shown an uneven distribution of the thematisation of
emotional or financial aspects across the different ratings. In order to interpret these
findings, it is helpful to take into account the specific audience design of the genre
of the so-called fan reports.42 As stated above, linguistic evaluation encompasses
both categorization and legitimation which will differ depending on the addressed
group. Generally speaking, writers of fan reports seek to share their experiences with
other actual or possible visitors of the events for which Eventim is selling tickets.
On the one hand, the targeted audiences include other fans who also passionately
admire the artists. By sharing their positive emotions in writing fan reports in an
expressive manner, writers may appeal for and align with a community of shared
feeling. On the other hand, fan reports are aimed at other consumers and function as
purchase recommendations, thus being a type of online word of mouth. 43 Of course,
fans are consumers too, and fans even can be defined as persons who invest time and
money in the relationship with a fan object with a certain regularity.44 To some
extent, also an enthusiastic review can be seen as an implicit purchase
recommendation. However, the writers tend to separate between these two functions,
which, as I want to suggest, are mirroring two different audiences, and their
orientation towards different orders of worth. In addition to lexical features already
discussed in the section above, stylistic features also play an important role which,
following Bell, can be described as indexing the presumed relation to other people.45
5.1. Non-standard spellings
As an example, I will first focus on non-standard spellings which are very common
in the genre of fan reports. As it has often been shown, non-standard spellings are
characteristic traits of different genres of text-based computer mediated
communication, “exhibit[ing] a wealth of non-verbal cues, providing information
and expressing emotional intimacy”.46 Additionally, non-standard spellings have
always played an important role in textual products of fans like fanzines.47 Following

17

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

the taxonomy of Androutsopoulos, different types of non-standard spellings can be
found in the corpus. First, prosodic spellings representing prosodic patterns are very
frequent. Common typographic means include character iterations representing
vowel lengthening (11) or capitals simulating word stress (12).
(11) Einfach der Waaaaahnsinn!!! (*****)
Simply aaaaaawesome!!!
(12) Das Konzert von Massive Attack war einfach SUPER! (*****)
The Massive Attack concert was just SUPER!

Both types can easily be queried in the corpus by regular expressions.
\S*(.)/1{3,}\S* matches all instances of character iterations within a word with
a minimal length of 3. [A-ZÄÖÜ]{2,} matches all capitalized words. The results
include highly frequent acronyms like CD, DJ and TV, which must be excluded. Fig.
4 and 5 show the distributions of both patterns, showing that they are mainly used in
five-star ratings. Assuming that both patterns can be interpreted as conventional
means for expressing emotional involvement, these findings support the hypothesis
that such stylistic choices serve to affiliate with others who share the writer’s
enthusiasm.

Fig. 4: Distribution of character iterations

18

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Fig. 5: Distribution of capitals

Second, various forms of phonetic spellings can be found, i.e. spellings that
mimetically reproduce colloquial pronunciation. A common technique is the
replacing of the word ending -er by -a like aba (but), supa and, most importantly,
hamma (roughly: awesome). Although it is difficult to query directly for phonetic
spelling, it seems that mainly expressive words are spelled that way. The spelling
hamma alone occurs 1099 times. Moreover, phonetic spellings of geil (awesome)
like gail or even goil can be observed. This latter spelling could be included under
the third type of regiolectal spellings, which represent features typical for regional
varieties. Especially reviews on artists who sing or perform in dialect often adapt to
this linguistic choice in order to express affinity towards the artist and “to convey a
positive assertion of local identity”.48 For instance, a review on a show of “Franken
goes Musical” is closed with an exclamative in Franconian dialect including the
characteristic invocation formula Allmächt:
(13) Allmächt, war des abba subber! (*****)
God almighty, that was great!

All the mentioned types of spellings share the common feature of emulating features
of orality in the written mode. They can be described as instances of what Koch and
Oesterreicher have called conceptual orality, which usually is associated – and thus
19

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

is able to construe – situations of informality, familiarity and communicative
immediacy.49 Therefore, these stylistic choices on the graphematic level, which all
are found to be typical for higher ratings, serve as rhetorical means for aligning with
other enthusiastic fans in an emotional way and help to build up communities of
shared feelings.
Next to these oral-like features, still other types of non-standard spellings can be
found that cannot be explained with reference to the sound of spoken language. An
example can be found in fan reports of the German Band “Tokio Hotel” who started
as teenagers and therefore had mostly teenage fans. In fan reports from the early
period, the somewhat systematic substitution of the letters g and k by q can often be
observed like in qeil, as well as the substitution of j by y:
(14) EiinfacH qEiiL!!! Ich war auf den konzerten in oberhausen und essen... es war einfach hamma
geil!!! die stimmung vor der halle war echt supi und als das konzert endlich anfing...OHA^^ einfach
nur bombe!!! man kann nicht richtig erklären wie es is...man muss selba auf einem TH konzert
gewesen sein!!! naya ich denke mir einfach mal:... DorTmunD wiirD geroqqT!!! (*****)
Just awesome. I was at the concerts in Oberhausen and Essen… it was just freakin’ amazing!!! The
atmosphere in front of the hall was really great and when the concert started… WHOA^^ just a
blast!!! You can’t really explain what it’s like… you have to be at a TH concert!!! Well, I just think
to myself:… Dortmund will be rocked!!!
(15) qeiiiL^^ whoaaa ich war Bremen o6,Bremen o7 und Hamburq o7!!! Das war so ends qeil^^ ich
kann nur jeden ein TH konzi empfehlen die sind live einfach soo geil.!! Bill singt mit so viel gefühl
*herzchen auqen krieq* xD Hamburq war für mich das qeiLste die stimmunq war der HAMMA
und ich hoffe das ich auch nach Essen kann das ist für mich so wichtiq DA bei zu sein!!naja ich
wünsche allen die auf jeden fall dahin qehen gaaanz viel spaß ... rockt nochmal mit den junqs
ordentlich die bude ^^ (*****)
Awesome^^ whoa I was Bremen 06, Bremen 07 and Hamburg 07!! That was so cool^^I can only
recommend a TH concert to everyone, they are just so cool live!! Bill sings with so much feeling
*heart-eyes* xD Hamburg was the best for me, the atmosphere was amazing and I hope that I can
go to Essen as well, it is so important for me to be there!! Well, I wish all who will go there a lot of
fun … rock the house again with the boys ^^

In German graphematics, spellings like qeil, geroqqt, wichtiq and naya are deviant,
but yet understandable. It can be ruled out that these are spelling or typing errors,
rather they are highly marked variants. Also, word internal capitalization or even the
constant change between upper and lower case like qEiiL or DorTmunD are common

20

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

stylistic features in Tokio Hotel reviews. Finally, emoticons, i.e. iconic uses of
characters in digital writing like ^^, x3, xD, =) or the like can often be found. All
these patterns form a kind of group style that serves as a subcultural identity marker
of the Tokio Hotel fan community as part of the so called Emo subculture. Its use
presupposes familiarity with group specific repertoires of evaluation50 and binds the
fans together as they share a common way of expressing their admiration and
enthusiasm in language – a way which includes those who are familiar with it and
excludes those who are not. In the special case of a teenage fan community, the
spelling’s deviance from orthographic norms as taught in school is likely to be an
additional motive for its use in the reviews. It thus seems reasonable that the reviews
are targeted at other fans, as it is explicitly stated in (15). A general recommendation
is made to visit a Tokio Hotel concert (kann nur jeden ein TH konzi empfehlen, just
can recommend a TH concert to everyone) which seems to be directed at outsiders.
However, it is overlaid by the direct address of other fans who will visit the Essen
concert with the imperative rockt nochmal […] die bude (rock the house again).
Although it is difficult to operationalize these group identity-related types of nonstandard spellings for a quantitative analysis, it seems that they occur mainly in very
enthusiastic reviews with five-star ratings.
5.2. Forms of address
Even more overt linguistic markers related to audience design are forms of address.
At least parts of the reviews are written in the second person plural. In some cases,
the writers explicitly address other potential concert visitors by second person
pronouns or even imperatives as already shown in (15).
(16) PINK live ist einfach der Hammer! Das müsst Ihr Euch anschauen! Geht hin und Ihr werdet
begeistert sein! (*****)
PINK live is simply awesome! You have to see it! Go there and you will be thrilled!

Thereby, writers explicitly position themselves and their addressees as parts of the
same community. Along with these addresses of the fan reports’ readers (and, at the
same time, potential ticket purchasers), addresses of the artists can frequently be
found, too:

21

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

(17) Über zwei Stunden ohne Pause, ja Jungs ihr wart einfach spitze. Macht weiter so.
Over two hours without a break, yes, guys, you were just great. Keep up the good work.

Moreover, addresses in the second person singular, particularly with the proximal
pronoun du expressing solidarity and intimacy,51 can be found in the corpus, which,
as in the following example, sometimes even sound like a love letter:
(18) Mein Mann und ich lieben Deine Musik. Auf unserer Hochzeit wollte ich keinen langweiligen
Walzer, sondern ein Lied von Dir. Du und ich für immer!
My husband and I love your music. At our wedding I didn't want a boring waltz, but a song by you.
You and me forever!

It can hardly be assumed that the writers of these reviews really do think that the
artists who are literally addressed will get notice of the reviews. Rather, these forms
of address, indicating a kind of para-social interaction,52 are to be described as means
of staging familiarity and closeness to the artist that is indeed primarily exhibited by
fans. By directly addressing the artists in front of the public audience, writers can
successfully act as fans with a particular close relation to their stars that privileges
them to communicate with them in a correspondingly intimate way.
Although this direct addressing of the artists is most frequent in the five-star ratings,
it can be found in the lower ratings, too:

22

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Fig. 6: Distribution of du

On a closer look, the one-star ratings with direct addressing often turn out to be
reviews by disappointed fans, that is fans who had very high expectations based on
their former experiences that were not fulfilled in this particular concert.
(19) Schade Schade Helene, daß Du dem Mainstream folgen mußt und Deine Show dadurch zum Pop
Klamauk herabstufst. Du bist so eine tolle Künstlerin! Ich verstehe nicht weshalb Du nicht nur
Deine eigenen Lieder präsentierst, sondern noch zig andere Interpreten nachsingen mußt, das hast
Du wirklich nicht nötig! (*)
It’s a pity Helene that you have to follow the mainstream and thus downgrade your show to pop
clamour. You are such a great artist! I don’t understand why you don’t just present your own songs,
but also have to sing after other artists, you really don’t need to do that

If the artist would have stayed true to herself and focused on her own music instead
of following the mainstream,53 the concert would have been of better quality. The
writer therefore presents herself as familiar enough with the artist to be able to judge
on this. The observation that direct forms of address, especially with the pronoun du,
serve as means of presenting oneself as a fan thus also holds true for their use in the
lower ratings.

23

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

6. Acts of positioning: Fandom vs. consumption
Within the enthusiastic reviews under the five-star ratings it stands out that economic
aspects like the money spent for the tickets or the like are hardly ever mentioned.
When expressing admiration as fans, they lose sight of the fact that they are
consumers who buy and consume products. On the other hand, it is precisely these
economic aspects that are addressed in the lower ratings, where enthusiasm seems
to lack. Some evidence for this can be found in the complementary distribution of
the lexical items Geld (money) and begeistert (enthusiastic), which suggests a
separation between the roles of consumers and fans:

Fig. 7: Distribution of begeistert and Geld

To put it in Boltanski & Thévenots terms, the writers orient towards different and
even competing orders of worth: the “inspired” order representing emotional
judgements on the one hand and the “market” order representing monetary
classifications on the other.54 By this divergent orientation, writers take different
roles and thus position themselves in different ways.
This separation between these two roles seems to be countered by the distribution of
the lexical item Fan which is also frequent in the lower ratings:

24

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Fig. 8: Distribution of Fan

On a closer look, however, there turn out to be different patterns of use. In the onestar ratings, common patterns include nur für Fans (only for fans) or nur für
eingefleischte/Hardcore Fans (only for die-hard fans) that clearly address fans as an
out-group which the writers themselves do not belong to:
(20) Solche Konzert scheinen nur etwas für Fans zu sein, die Ihre Gruppe auch persönlich erleben
möchten. Um die Musik scheint es dabei nicht wirklich zu gehen. (*)
Such concerts only seem to be something for fans who want to experience their group in person. It
doesn't really seem to be about the music.
(21) Für Hardcore Kelly Fans sicher ein Muss. Alle Anderen sollten sich auf viel Lärm einstellen. (*)
For die-hard Kelly fans certainly a must. All others should be prepared for a lot of noise.

From a disappointed consumer’s perspective, fans are profiled as people who are so
fanatic and irrational in their fanhood55 that they will ignore the bad artistic quality
of the performance, be it by giving more weight to the experience in person (20), be
it by perceiving pure noise as music (21). Therefore, fans appear as people unable to
realistically assess the poor economic balance of the product. This incompatibility
between fandom on the one hand and economic judgement on the other is explicitly
stated in (22):

25

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

(22) Fazit: unverschämte Abzocke für teures Geld und viele Fans wollen das nicht merken. Nie mehr
irgendeinen Cent für Genesis. (*)
Conclusion: outrageous rip-off for a lot of money and many fans don't want to notice that. Never
again any cent for Genesis.

In the five-star ratings, the pattern nur für eingefleischte Fans is usually negated in
order to emphasize the positive evaluation even more, as the quality of the
performance is objectively evident also for non-fans:
(23) Wahnsinnig tolltes Konzert, charmant bayrisch und nicht nur für eingefleischte Fans. (*****)
Insanely great concert, charmingly Bavarian and not only for die-hard fans.

In this example, the writer leaves open whether she is a fan by herself. In other cases,
the lexical item fan is clearly used as a self-reference as already shown in the very
first example in the introduction. Accordingly, patterns like wir Fans (us fans) or
wir als Fans (we as fans) occur mainly in the five-star ratings.
(24) Die Stimmung sensationell, die alten Herren haben wieder so richtig abgerockt, wir Fans nicht
weniger. (*****)
The atmosphere was sensational, the old men really rocked out again, us fans no less.
(25) Als Fans vom Circus Roncalli können wir nur sagen: absolutes muß (*****)
As fans of Circus Roncalli, we can only say: an absolute must!

Note that in (24) the adverb wieder (again) identifies the writer as a regular concert
visitor of the reviewed group which also qualifies her as a fan.
In terms of the stance triangle model Du Bois56, these findings can be systematized
as follows.57 The function of five-star ratings can be described as self-positioning of
fans who thereby align with other enthusiastic fans. As noted above, they build up
communities of shared feelings through this and even may establish idiosyncratic
linguistic codes that will exclude everyone not familiar with it. In the lower ratings,
by contrast, writers typically position themselves as disappointed consumers who,
on the one hand, distance themselves from the fans as irrational subjects unable to
judge objectively on the economic value of the product. On the other hand, they align
26

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

with other potential consumers, often by explicitly giving advice against purchase.
Seen from this perspective, the fan reports’ heterarchy of standards of evaluation and
their linguistic expression and negotiation can at least partly be resolved by assigning
them to different types of social demarcation.

7. Conclusion
In this paper, I have analysed fan reports, that is online concert reviews written by
customers of the ticket agency Eventim. With corpus linguistic methods and by
using the ratings as metadata, I have analysed lexical and stylistic features of
evaluative language within the genre of fan reports which is located between the two
poles of fandom and consumption. Starting from linguistic theories of evaluation
and of social positioning, I have developed an analytical framework which combines
a data-driven approach to the analysis of patterns of evaluative language with
functional and discourse-oriented perspectives. As I have shown, in the higher
ratings fans typically express their enthusiasm while they tend to play down
economic aspects of concert business in favour of fan culture as an emotional
community. Of course, fans are also customers and consumers of economic
products, but this very fact, the economic side of the culture industry, so to speak, is
hardly ever mentioned. By contrast, in the lower ratings people often oppose to the
concept of fandom already imposed by the name of the genre and profile their
purchase recommendations as not affected by the irrational admiration practices of
fans. Therefore, the fan reports reflect the orientation towards competing orders of
worth which is in turn used as a resource for social demarcations.
Of course, the ticket agency’s website section entitled „Fanreports“ is a commercial
space in the first place. In a way, the company is taking economic advantage of the
fans, their experiences and their expertise in order to promote their products.
Nevertheless, it is the particularly enthusiastic fans who appropriate the platform and
use it as a communicative space for subcultural practices and community building
beyond economisation. However, in contrast to genuine formats of fan culture and
fan productivity like fanzines or fan forums, the genre of fan reports is always
permeated by economic judgements. The fact that the reviewed concerts are part of
a concert business and the result of a comprehensive commodification of culture
remains ever present. The genre of fan reports thus sheds light on the constitution
27

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

and transformation of fan cultures and the intersection of subcultural practice and
commodification.
Further research could address related forms of (online) reviews e.g. in the domain
of social reading, where again other heterarchies of standards of evaluation and
different social functions might be observed. Still the genre of fan reports as analysed
in this paper is a most interesting case in point for a corpus linguistic and cultural
analytic study of multifunctional evaluation practices. Methodologically, this paper
shows how both the study of online reviews and of fan cultural practices can benefit
from corpus linguistic methods. Moreover, it shows how a data-driven approach
oriented towards linguistic aspects of evaluation practices can complement
sociological approaches to evaluation and make them empirically more precise.

Notes
1

All translations are my own. Note that many of the original quotes show characteristic features of internet-based
writing like missing blanks, incomplete punctuation and so on. I will drop these features in my translations and will
point to them in the text only if they are crucial for my argumentation.
Heike Wiese, “So as a Focus Marker in German,” Linguistics 49, no. 5 (2011): 997,
https://doi.org/10.1515/ling.2011.028.
2

Hubert Knoblauch, “Publikumsemotionen: Kollektive Formen kommunikativen Handelns und die Affektivität bei
Großpublika in Sport und Religion,” Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik 46, no. 4 (2016): 552,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41244-016-0040-4.
3

4

Camilla Vasquez, The Discourse of Online Consumer Reviews (London: Bloomsbury, 2014),
https://doi.org/10.5040/9781472593535.
Vasquez; Judith Bridges and Camilla Vásquez, “If nearly all Airbnb reviews are positive, does that make them
meaningless?,” Current Issues in Tourism 21, no. 18 (2018): 2065–83,
https://doi.org/10.1080/13683500.2016.1267113.
5

Cornelius Puschmann and Alison Powell, “Turning Words Into Consumer Preferences: How Sentiment Analysis Is
Framed in Research and the News Media,” Social Media + Society 4, no. 3 (2018): 1–12,
https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305118797724.
6

Monika Bednarek, “Fandom,” in Pragmatics of Social Media, ed. Christian Hoffmann and Wolfram Bublitz
(Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2017), 545–72, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110431070-020; Paul Booth, A
Companion to Media Fandom and Fan Studies, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119237211; Stefan Hauser and
Simon Meier-Vieracker, eds., Fankulturen und Fankommunikation, Forum Angewandte Linguistik 68 (Berlin:
Lang, 2022).
7

John Fiske, “The Cultural Economy of Fandom,” in The Adoring Audience. Fan Culture and Popular Media, ed.
Lisa A. Lewis (London, New York: Routledge, 1992), 30.
8

28

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Michael Klemm, “Doing being a fan im Web 2.0. Selbstdarstellung, soziale Stile und Aneignungspraktiken in
Fanforen,” Zeitschrift Für Angewandte Linguistik 56, no. 1 (2012): 3–32, https://doi.org/10.1515/zfal-2012-0002;
Bednarek, “Fandom.”
9

10

Rainer Diaz-Bone, Kulturwelt, Diskurs und Lebensstil: eine diskurstheoretische Erweiterung der Bourdieuschen
Distinktionstheorie, 2nd ed., Theorie und Praxis der Diskursforschung (Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften, 2010).
Andreas Wagenknecht, “‘Trotzdem sollte man als Metalfan dieses Album besitzen.’ Online-Rezensionen auf
Amazon als Form der Fankommunikation,” in Fankulturen und Fankommunikation, ed. Stefan Hauser and Simon
Meier-Vieracker, Forum Angewandte Linguistik 68 (Berlin: Lang, 2022), 177–198.
11

12

Fiske, “The Cultural Economy of Fandom,” 46.

13

J. Martin and Peter R. R. White, The Language of Evaluation. Appraisal in English (New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2005), 5, https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230511910.
Simon Meier, “Einzelkritiken in der Fußballberichterstattung. Evaluativer Sprachgebrauch aus
korpuspragmatischer Sicht,” Muttersprache 129 (2019): 1–23.
14

John W. Du Bois, “The Stance Triangle,” in Stancetaking in Discourse: Subjectivity, Evaluation, Interaction, ed.
Robert Englebretson, vol. 164 (Amsterdam: Benjamins, 2007), 143, https://doi.org/10.1075/pbns.164.07du.
15

Geoff Thompson and Susan Hunston, “Evaluation: An Introduction,” in Evaluation in Text. Authorial Stance and
the Construction of Discourse, ed. Susan Hunston and Geoff Thompson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 8.
16

Martin and White, The Language of Evaluation. Appraisal in English; Michele Zappavigna, “Evaluation,” in
Pragmatics of Social Media, ed. Christian Hoffmann and Wolfram Bublitz (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2017), 435–
58, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110431070-016.
17

Bronwyn Davies and Rom Harré, “Positioning: The Discursive Production of Selves,” Journal for the Theory of
Social Behaviour 20, no. 1 (1990): 43–63, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5914.1990.tb00174.x.
18

19

Du Bois, “The Stance Triangle.”

20

The function of evaluation practices as a form of socio-cultural (self-)positioning is also emphasized by Stefan
Nicolae et al., “Soziologie des Wertens und Bewertens,” in (Be)Werten. Beiträge zur sozialen Konstruktion von
Wertigkeit, ed. Stefan Nicolae et al., Soziologie des Wertens und Bewertens (Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien,
2019), 14, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-21763-1_
Jannis K. Androutsopoulos, “Non-Standard Spellings in Media Texts: The Case of German Fanzines,” Journal of
Sociolinguistics 4, no. 4 (November 2000): 527, https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9481.00128.
21

Allan Bell, “Language Style as Audience Design,” Language in Society 13, no. 2 (1984): 145–204.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/4167516.
22

Michèle Lamont, “Toward a Comparative Sociology of Valuation and Evaluation,” Annual Review of Sociology
38, no. 1 (2012): 205f., https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-070308-120022.
23

Frank Meier, Thorsten Peetz, and Désirée Waibel, “Bewertungskonstellationen. Theoretische Überlegungen zur
Soziologie der Bewertung,” Berliner Journal für Soziologie 26, no. 3/4 (2016): 319, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11609017-0325-7; Anne K. Krüger and Martin Reinhart, “Theories of Valuation - Building Blocks for Conceptualizing
Valuation between Practice and Structure,” Historical Social Research 42, no. 1 (2017): 278f.,
https://doi.org/10.12759/hsr.42.2017.1.263-285.
24

25

Nicolae et al., “Soziologie des Wertens und Bewertens.”

29

WRITING FAN REPORTS AS A MULTIFUNCTIONAL EVALUATION PRACTICE

26

Lamont, “Toward a Comparative Sociology of Valuation and Evaluation,” 208.

Luc Boltanski and Laurent Thévenot, “The Sociology of Critical Capacity,” European Journal of Social Theory 2,
no. 3 (1999): 368, https://doi.org/10.1177/136843199002003010.
27

Helmut Schmid, “Probabilistic Part-of-Speech Tagging Using Decision Trees,” in New Methods In Language
Processing, ed. D.B. Jones and H. Somers (London: Routledge, 2003), 154–64.
28

Stefan Evert and CWB Development Team, “The IMS Open Corpus Workbench (CWB),” 2019,
http://cwb.sourceforge.net/files/CQP_Tutorial.pdf.
29

Andrew Hardie, “CQPweb — Combining Power, Flexibility and Usability in a Corpus Analysis Tool,”
International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 17, no. 3 (2012): 380–409, https://doi.org/10.1075/ijcl.17.3.04har.
30

31

Access to the corpora can be granted on request at https://fussballlinguistik.de/korpora/registrierung/

32

Bridges and Vásquez, “If nearly all Airbnb reviews are positive, does that make them meaningless?,” 2059.

Anita Pomerantz, “Agreeing and Disagreeing with Assessments: Some Features of Preferred/Dispreferred Turn
Shaped,” in Structures of Social Action. Studies in Conversation Analysis, ed. J. Maxwell Atkinson and John
Heritage (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 57–101.
33

Jonathan Culpeper and Jane Demmen, “Keywords,” in The Cambridge Handbook of English Corpus Linguistics,
ed. Douglas Biber and Randi Reppen (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015), 90–105,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139764377.006.
34

Meier, “Einzelkritiken in der Fußballberichterstattung. Evaluativer Sprachgebrauch aus korpuspragmatischer
Sicht.”
35

Birte Arendt and Pavla Schäfer, “Bewertungen mm Wissenschaftsdiskurs. Eine Analyse von ReviewKommentaren als Aushandlungspraxis normativer Erwartungen,” LiLi 177 (2015): 104.
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03379894.
36

37

The role of attitudinal stance adverbs for evaluation in online reviews is also emphasized by Vasquez, The
Discourse of Online Consumer Reviews, 39.
38

Martin and White, The Language of Evaluation. Appraisal in English, 37; Zappavigna, “Evaluation,” 439.

39

Vasquez, The Discourse of Online Consumer Reviews, 47.

Christopher Potts and Florian Schwarz, “Affective ‘This,’” Linguistic Issues in Language Technology 3, no. 5
(2010): 14f. https://doi.org/10.33011/lilt.v3i.1219.
40

41

This method is extensively discussed by Noah Bubenhofer, Sprachgebrauchsmuster. Korpuslinguistik als
Methode der Diskurs- und Kulturanalyse (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, 2009),
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110215854.
42

Bell, “Language Style as Audience Design.”

Ana Margarida Barreto, “The Word-of-Mouth Phenomenon in the Social Media Era,” International Journal of
Market Research 56, no. 5 (2014): 631–54, https://doi.org/10.2501/IJMR-2014-043.
43

Jochen Roose, Mike S. Schäfer, and Thomas Schmidt-Lux, “Einleitung. Fans als Gegenstand soziologischer
Forschung,” in Fans. Soziologische Perspektiven, ed. Jochen Roose, Mike S. Schäfer, and Thomas Schmidt-Lux
(Wiesbaden: Springer VS, 2010), 14.
44

30

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Allan Bell, “Back in Style: Reworking Audience Design,” in Style and Sociolinguistic Variation., ed. Penelope
Eckert and John R Rickford (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002), 141f.
45

Yen-Liang (Eric) Lin, “Non-Standard Capitalisation and Vocal Spelling in Intercultural Computer-Mediated
Communication,” Corpora 11, no. 1 (2016): 64, https://doi.org/10.3366/cor.2016.0085. See also further references
in this section.
46

47

Androutsopoulos, “Non-Standard Spellings in Media Texts.”

48

Androutsopoulos, 525.

Peter Koch and Wulf Oesterreicher, “Schriftlichkeit und Kommunikative Distanz,” Zeitschrift für Germanistische
Linguistik 35, no. 3 (2007): 346–75, https://doi.org/10.1515/zgl.2007.024.
49

50

Nicolae et al., “Soziologie des Wertens und Bewertens,” 14.

Roger Brown and Albert Gilman, “The Pronouns of Power and Solidarity,” in Readings in the Sociology of
Language, ed. Joshua A. Fishman (Berlin, Boston: de Gruyter, 1968), 252–75,
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110805376.252.
51

Donald Horton and Richard Wohl, “Mass Communication and Para-Social Interaction: Observations on Intimacy
at a Distance,” Psychiatry 19, no. 3 (1956): 215–29, https://doi.org/10.1080/00332747.1956.11023049.
52

For the discursive functions of the concept of “mainstream” cf. Sarah Thornton, Club Cultures: Music, Media and
Subcultural Capital (John Wiley & Sons, 1995), 5.
53

54

Boltanski and Thévenot, “The Sociology of Critical Capacity,” 368.

This view was also wide-spread in early sociological accounts of fandom. Cf. Joli Jenson, “Fandom as Pathology.
The Consequences of Characterization,” in Adoring Audience, ed. Lisa A. Lewis (London, New York: Routledge,
1992), 9–29.
55

56

Du Bois, “The Stance Triangle.”

57

The function of evaluation practices as a form of socio-cultural (self-)positioning is also emphasized by Nicolae et
al., “Soziologie des Wertens und Bewertens,” 14.

31

