Journal of
Cultural Analytics

April 20, 2022

Rhythms of Silence: Digital audio
analysis of Swedish Radio
Broadcasting, 1980-1989
Johan Malmstedt
Johan Malmstedt, Umeå University, Sweden
Peer-Reviewer: Alexander Russo
Dataverse DOI: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/BHDTTJ
Article DOI: https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.34715

ABSTRACT
How can silence be studied, and what can we learn from it? This article explores the so-called
‘modernization’ of Swedish Public Service radio by pertaining to pauses, halts and the absence
of content. By applying computational analysis to the broadcasting archive, radio can be
explored on a larger scale than previously affordable. The article argues that it is possible to
understand the rhythm between more and less dense content by studying the distribution of
silence in time. The analysis focuses on how varying degrees of silence are distributed
throughout the day in broadcasting by the Public Service Program 1 (P1). Sweden was one of
the last western, democratic countries to undergo broadcasting de-monopolization. However, in
order to stimulate a modernization process, competition was introduced within the state
monopoly before the proper commercialization of radio in 1993. Though the actual effect of this
process remains disputed, the last decade of the Swedish radio monopoly is considered a
significant media historical period of transition. Whilst the organizational structure endured,
public discourse witnessed a clash between new and old ideas concerning the very essence of
radio. The period thus enables the study of radio in transition.
To grasp the potential effects of these debates and organizational changes on the very content of
radio, this study takes its cue from the overlooked but essential matter of silence in the radio
medium. Tracing the changes and trends in a set of sample weeks from 1980 to 1989, the results
indicate both how the amount of silence diminished and its rhythm became more uniform. Whilst
providing insights into the style of Swedish public service radio, the work is also intended to
inspire new, creative ways of researching sound media.

Rhythms of silence
Thirteen days of radio silence. During two weeks in spring 1980, the Swedish
airwaves were empty. At least according to the archive at the National Library of
Sweden, which already at the time kept complete recordings of the daily
Journal of Cultural Analytics 7.1 (2022): 108-138

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

broadcasting. Omissions of this kind were rare, and as it turns out, this literal archival
silence is no result of documentation error. These dates coincide with the largest
strike in Swedish history. ‘The Great Conflict’, as it has come to be remembered,
was the escalation of growing unrest over the cause of several wage cuts throughout
the 1970s.1 Come spring 1980, the union had managed to engage over 700 000
workers from across the labor force, resulting in a strike that effectively put the entire
country to a halt. In prior historical research, the actual strike is conceived to have
lasted between the 2nd and 11th of May, yet the void in the radio archive starts already
on the 29th of April.2 This suggests that Swedish radio, in effect, might have predated
the official strike action, calling for a revised role of media in the history of ‘The
Great Conflict’. We can arrive at this conclusion by paying attention to the very
absence of content. In the sound archive, silence is information.

This article maps and analyzes silence in the history of Swedish public broadcasting.
The proposition is simple: silence constitutes an important, yet historically
contingent feature of the radio medium which allows for qualitative research.
Throughout the 20th century, radio silence has been understood as vital for
communication, beneficial for the audience as well as a serious danger to the very
medium itself. Broadcasting is today often regulated by silence detectors warning
against any undesirable pauses. According to Andrew Crisell’s 1986 milestone in
radio semiotics, the medium can in fact be condensed to just two parameters: “noise
and silence”.3 Despite this, the history of radio silences has remained largely in the
unexplored periphery of media studies.

But how can silence be explored, and what can we learn from it? This article
proposes a method for computational analysis of silence in sound media. By
mapping how silence occurs throughout the broadcasting day, my research
109

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

contributes to the understanding of the aesthetics of public service radio. For this
purpose, the Swedish case offers a unique opportunity. Prior historical research has
linked a more hostile stance towards radio silence to commercial radio production
and the economic dependency on the listener numbers.4 In contrast, Sweden can be
considered the staple example of public service media, where production was to a
large extent state-financed. In the early postwar era, Sweden had one of the most
vacant broadcasting schedules in all Europe.5 Not only was the program schedule
itself spacious, pauses and halts are supposed to have occurred with high frequency.6
There are even occasions were Swedish critics praised the pauses between speech,
granting the listener time to contemplate the messages.7

Swedish radio history is distinctive in two interesting ways. First off, Sweden
sustained a radio monopoly all through the 1980s, at a time when European
broadcasting policy was characterized by increasingly liberalist measures. As a
result, Sweden witnessed a delayed and debated reception of the Anglo-American
commercial style of radio. Secondly, Sweden was one of the first countries in the
world to legislate a rule of legal deposit for complete broadcasting. Total archiving
was unheard of in most places at the time, and radio is said to have been the most
scarcely archived mass medium throughout the second half of the 20 th century.8
Swedish history sets itself apart from this tendency through the 1979 legal deposit
act, which is registered as the first in the world to include radio and television.9 This
early and extensive collection of broadcasting data, combined with late demonopolization, provides an illustrative opportunity to study the history of public
service broadcasting. The analysis focuses specifically on broadcasting by the
Swedish radio monopoly flagship P1 – or Program 1, the so-called “spoken channel”
– from 1980 to 1989. Established in 1925, it was the first radio channel in the country
and it remains the flagship of Swedish public service broadcasting. The content is
110

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

considered to be oriented towards information and news and is to a large extent
composed by speech.

This analysis extracts data on the distribution and rhythm of silence throughout the
broadcasting day. By computational means, the rhythmic variations in density of
silence within this material can be coded and analyzed on a larger scale than possible
with human listening. The aim of this article is to map these rhythms and
subsequently examine how the results can be connected to previous media historical
research. The term ‘rhythm’ is here referring to the fluctuations between varying
densities of silence throughout the day. As the analysis demonstrates, by studying
these fluctuations it is possible to explore aspects of what Raymond Williams called
the “flow” of media.10 William observed how television and radio came to offer their
own characteristic media experience by replacing the discrete pages of the book with
an uninterrupted flow. He particularly points out how it is the careful management,
and minimization, of “intervals”, which is constitutive for the experience of
broadcasting as a never-seizing stream of content, fused together through sound. The
quantitative study of silence, or “intervals” can thus grant insight into how radio has
changed over time.11 This was also the proposition put forward by one of the key
figures in the emergence of sound studies, Murray Schafer. In his reflections on
“rhythms” in his book The Soundscape from 1977, he proposed that “broadcasting
is always changing and these changes can thus be studied, exactly as a critic or
historian studies the styles and tendencies of contrasting schools of literature or
music”.12 He proceeds by stating that these changes can be considered in “how
broadcasting was at first occasional, separated by extensive periods of silence or
low-keyed activity”.13 Influenced by this careful attention to the historical style of
broadcasting, it is today possible to explore the very signal itself. The method of
digital signal processing allows for a study of radio history, not only through textual
111

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

remains but by means of preserved signal values. This connotes what Wolfgang
Ernst has dubbed “radical media archeology”, in the sense that it “stays close to the
signal”, and “concentrates on the non-discursive elements in dealing with the past”.14
The results presented in my article confirm the prospect of such an approach. By
paying close attention to the signal, it is possible to provide an elementary overview
of the rhythm of the entire broadcasting day, which in turn grants new insights into
the stylistic development of radio. As the distribution of silence is compared
throughout the decade, on a scale unaffordable for human listening, results indicate
that P1 was developing in the direction of a more effective broadcasting style.
Silence does not only gradually decrease; it also settles into a more uniform rhythm.
Furthermore, the results can be constructively put in dialogue with previous media
historical scholarship, both in order to confirm the plausibility of the results, and
contribute new knowledge to the debated history of the decentralization of Swedish
radio.

Analyzing radio silence
To quote Swedish Radio Scholar Carin Åberg: “Radio Analysis? Sure! But How?” 15
When Åberg posed this quite legitimate methodological question back in 2001, she
was echoing simultaneous research interests in German radio studies. This emerging
approach to radio analysis aimed to move beyond content and “look more deeply
into the structure of the programmes”.16 Together with authors like Detlef Schröter,
she pioneered the practical application of the theories of Raymond William to radio
material.17 With the ambition to study “radio as sound in time”, she ventured into
the quantitative analysis of the aesthetics and form of radio.18 Nevertheless, this
method quickly ran into a significant obstacle. To manually code entire days of radio
content is slow and tedious work. Every minute of material demanded real-time
analysis by the researcher. Today, such problems can be bypassed by tapping into
112

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

the affordance of digital audio signal processing. By feeding these tasks to the
machine, it becomes possible to consider “the structure of the programmes” on an
unexplored scale.

Two principal criteria need to be set in order to study radio silence as quantifiable
data; amplitude and duration. This analysis employs a negative definition of silence,
as anything that isn’t sound. Therefore, these two criteria will determine the status
of sound, and silence will be calculated as any sequence not qualifying as sound.
Since there is no absolute silence on the radio, a threshold is needed to determine the
amplitude of silence. The somewhat puzzling question of how silent silence is, can
today productively be translated into a matter of the loudness of the background
noise. In the age of modern signal processing, this pursuit is best understood in terms
of the signal-to-noise ratio. This technique, which Friedrich Kittler once proposed
to be the successor to poetry and hermeneutics, is the mathematical estimation of
what matters, and what doesn’t, in regards to the transmission of a message.19 From
this perspective, silence is demarcated by the static background noise indicating the
temporary absence of radio content. The specific level of this static can be
determined through spectral analysis – that is, the analysis of a spectrum of
frequencies – by which it is possible to single out the frequency of the background
noise and measure its amplitude separately. Figure 1 demonstrates a sample from
the audio, where a low-frequency buzz is detectable. As the level of the background
noise may vary due to the shifting quality of pre-recorded material, a sample every
twenty minutes has been used to determine the appropriate threshold.

113

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

Figure 1: Spectral image of background noise measured by its negative decibel value. The amplitude is centered
around the low end of the frequency spectrum, indicating a low buzz. By measuring the negative decibel of this
background noise, it is possible to set a variable threshold for when actual auditory activity appears.

The second criterion concerns the aspect of duration. As with amplitude, the
employed definition is defined negatively, and thus, what must be defined is the
threshold length of a sound. Depending on the frequency of the sound, the upper
limit of what the human ear possibly can perceive is very short. A very high-pitched
sound can potentially be audible even at a duration up to a couple of milliseconds.
However, in the case of this archived material, the broadcasting was originally
recorded on tape. Due to the quality of the cassette decks that were used, many
recordings suffer from pre-and post-echo. This phenomenon, which can be caused
both by magnetization and compression of a recording, produces an effect where
every click, or infinitesimally short sound, is spread out and extended by thousands
of milliseconds. In order to avoid as much as possible of these disturbances, the
threshold for what is counted as sound is set to any duration longer than 500
milliseconds. Reversely, based on the prior research in the field of conversation
analysis and linguistics, the duration of a silent part must be longer than 300
milliseconds to count.20 This method, therefore, assumes a definition of silence

114

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

which is defined negatively as any moment of broadcasting where a signal does not
remain above the background noise threshold for more than half a second. In this
sense, the method is mimicking the praxis of ‘silence detection’, already employed
within broadcasting.
The data that is utilized in my research is composed of digitized recordings of live
broadcasting. The original recordings, made on tape, were documented by the
Swedish radio. Back in 1966, a new law rendered Swedish broadcasting accountable
to conserve all broadcasted material for 6 months. The initiative was financed by the
Swedish state and was intended to provide juridical evidence for issues related to
broadcasting.21 This process had demonstrated how total radio recording was
possible, yet the purpose at the time was not historical, and therefore no archival
measures were undertaken. This would all change when the law of legal deposit for
audiovisual media was reformed in 1979. According to the legal deposit register at
the International Association of Sound and Audiovisual Archive, Sweden was the
first country to attempt a complete archiving of public service broadcasting.22 With
financial backing from the state, the Swedish National Archive of Recorded Sound
and Moving Images was inaugurated. This new archival institution was equipped
with storage capacity suited for far more extensive documentation.23 The new scope
of the archive meant no extensive changes to the technical infrastructure. It was the
economic aspect which was more daunting. What was needed was more tape, and a
lot of it. In contrast to the juridical material, which could be rerecorded twice every
year, this new documentation required a constant expenditure. Therefore, the
juridical material could be stored on high quality tape, whilst the archive recordings
were object to economic restraints. The result is that sections of the documented
material suffer from an apparent tape noise.

115

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

Digitization, later conducted by the National Library of Sweden, transferred the
material from tape to Waveform Audio File Format. The digitized documents
correspond to the manner in which the material was originally recorded. The daily
broadcasting is composed of three separate files, each containing six hours of
content, ranging from 06:00 in the morning, until 24:00, midnight. My research
attends only to the week days, excluding weekends. In an early state of research, it
was clear that the weekends, in their concisely different structure, provided
variations in the statistics which would have required a separate analysis. The data
is thus composed of the collected week days from the same one sample week every,
week nine of the year. The results are controlled against another sample week,
composed from randomized weekdays from every year. Altogether, the data set is
composed of 1800 hours of broadcasting, over 100 days. To randomly sample
complete broadcasting days in this manner is only possible due to the unique
affordances of the Swedish media archive. 24 The rigorous collection grants access
to plenty of new ways to study broadcasting during the welfare state epoch, far from
exhausted by this article.

The audio files have also required considerable data cleaning. I have mainly
employed two computational tools for preparing and studying the data. For the
purpose of simple labeling and time stamping, aubio has been employed. Aubio is
an audio labeling tool kit developed in the programming language of C.25 It is written
in order to run directly in Python, and provides a simple and effective audio
processing tool. For the purpose of the aforementioned cleaning, more advanced
software was necessary. The process, which mostly consisted in the removal of
irrelevant rewind noises remaining from the original tape recording, was carried out
in Audacity.26 This free software is recognized and an established tool in audio

116

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

analysis. By virtue of being open-source, the simple, yet hands-on controls are under
constant improvement, and therefore appropriate for data cleaning.

Audacity has also been used for control listening. After marking up the silence in
the data, the subsequent timestamps have been reapplied to the audio file. The
resulting edit contains only the total silence of the recording, contracted together.
This technique has been used in order to determine the accuracy of the method,
granting insight into what the program renders as silence. The applied method has
the limitation of consequently rendering every signal below the level of the
background noise as silence. For the question at hand, this is deemed as an affordable
loss, as most of these sounds would be too quiet to be audible. Yet, there are
exceptions, where distinguished sounds remain buried under the surface noise level.
Such occasions are part of signal processing theory, and commonly referred to as
“artefacts”. Figure 2 displays how elusive these phenomena appear, yet by
amplifying the audio signal, it is sometimes possible to identify an auditory event.

Figure 2: Image of an artefact. The slight increase in the lower frequencies in the middle of the image indicates an
auditory event. At this level, it remains quiet and covered in noise, imperceptible by the human ear, yet with enough
amplification, it might be possible to identify the sound.

To investigate the sort of sounds which lay sunken beneath the threshold of silence,
sample excavation has been conducted on every file. The results, however curious,
117

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

seem not to interfere with the validity of the method. The detected artefacts consist
most commonly of external respiration; breathing and sighs. On rare occasions,
mumbled voices have also been detected. These appear not to be part of the
intentional broadcast, as the speech is imperceptible, and appear to take place behind
a wall. Finally, some artefacts are the last moments of music being faded out. My
discoveries are similar to the ones detected by Matt Rogalsky in his artist work with
silences in broadcasting at the BBC: “I immediately discovered that the ‘silences’
were interesting; they weren’t silent at all. They were full of tiny sounds which
mainly went unnoticed in the flow of a broadcast, and also included a strong human
presence mostly in the form of breath”.27 These are interesting discoveries in their
own right, but they are neither the subject for this study, neither do they, as Rogalsky
proposes, pose any greater effect on the experience of the broadcasting.

Silence in the history of radio
Radio was an integral part of the sonic transformation of the 20th century, attracting
attention from a range of cultural critics. The swiss philosopher Max Picard, for
example, linked the development of radio to an overall loss of silence. In his book,
Die Welt des Schweigens from 1948 – translated as The World of Silence – he proclaimed radio to be the final nail in the coffin for silence. “Man is no longer aware
of the radio-noise all around him. He does not hear the constant hum of the radio: it
has become a kind of noisy silence of which he hardly takes any notice at all,
however loud it may be all around him”.28 If, to Picard, radio was auxiliary to the
disappearance of contemplative quietness, the medium simultaneously seemed to
establish its own form of silence.

Researcher like John Mowitt and Kate Lacey have demonstrated how radio
producers in America developed a sophisticated usage of absences in broadcasting
118

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

content.29 An illustrative example can be found in the final lines of the script for the
renowned radio rendition of Welles’ “War of The Worlds” – which called for ‘dead
silence’. In order to leave a final haunting impression on the audience, producers
first considered the sound of an alien laser beam. Instead, however, they went with
the far more subtle effect of a staged broadcast interruption. One had to be familiar
with the haunting effects of this crackling absence of content in order to realize that
it would prove far more unsettling than any loud weapon sound. Yet, radio silence
wasn’t only discovered as a narrative device. In the 1930s, pauses came to be a
valued feature in broadcasting. The BBC could insert a 15 minutes break between
programs to let the audience “contemplate what they just heard”.30 There are
indications that a similar positive attitude towards silence informed the dawn of
Swedish radio production. In 1925, an early on-site segment from the Gothenburg
harbor received praise for the reporter’s bold use of silence. The supposedly five
minutes long pause provided the listeners with suggestive environmental sounds and
allowed time for contemplation.31 The idea that pauses in broadcasting could be used
to provide the listener time to reflect recalls the musings of the proclaimed “first
media man” and radio programmer Filson Young. To Young, silence was “a
definitive opportunity to sit without the distraction of voice and sound, and think the
thoughts that are within oneself”.32 Nevertheless, prior research has demonstrated
how such positive conceptions of silence were restricted to public service
broadcasting.33 In early British commercial radio, silence was instead perceived as a
threat. Absence of content was considered to increase the risk of losing the listener.
In order to keep the audience transfixed, commercial radio had to supply an
unwavering flow of content. The distribution of silence on radio can thus be
understood in analogy to Raymond William’s writings on the flow of television.
Silences between discrete sequences of content disrupt “the process of relative
unification, into a flow of otherwise diverse or at best loosely related items”. 34
119

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

Williams propose his concept of media flow in order to get at the glue of television,
but as researcher like Mimi White has argued, it is equally appliable on radio.35 The
manner in which contentless gaps are left in the ether is part and parcel of the
historical development of any sonic broadcasting media.

Prior research has connected the venture to minimize silence, to the development of
commercial radio during the interwar period in America. Within this context, a
hostile view towards extended absences of content was cultivated. Aptly put, “[t]he
absence of predetermined sound (‘dead air’) is anathema, and every second of
precious ad airtime is carefully scheduled”.36 By the late 1960s, it was possible to
declare that radio silence itself might be “dead”.37 Paddy Scannell regards this as an
almost natural tendency in the radio medium as such:
“But radio has no sense of occasion, of a time and place set apart from ordinary
life and affairs. On the contrary, its distinctive features are the reverse of
occasionality. Because it appears as a domestic utility always on tap like water,
gas or electricity it must always have an available content. Thus, the momentum
of broadcasting has always been towards a continuous, uninterrupted flow of
program output.”38

In prior research on radio silence in the British context, the reduction of silence is
often directly linked to the concept of commercialization. In the early days of British
and American commercial radio, the tempo and content of programming were both
suited to an ideal audience. Subsequently, this change in commercial broadcasting
style has been proven to also influence public service content. In 1969, the BBC
concluded that the challenges posed by commercial radio and television meant that
public service broadcasting needed to adapt to a “changing world to meet changing
120

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

tastes and needs”.39 Old time radio programming, with its breaks, sudden changes,
and pleasant surprises was “inherently unfit” to provide its services to the new
audience. What was required was a “more uniform and predictable kind of content,
an uninterrupted supply of music, perhaps, or of information”.40

The BBC was not alone in facing these troubles. Stirrings in the structure and role
of radio have been observed in many liberal democratic countries in the early second
half of the 20th century.41 In this context, silence is suggested to decline as a
consequence of adjusting radio to the modern listener. This was a listener who was
perceived to reach for the transmission knob without hesitation, at the slightest pause
between content. In prior media historical research, commercial radio is usually
proposed to be the culprit in this development. “Commercial radio avoids all
moments of silence with a three-second cut-off point. This prevents the space of
anticipation to extend into doubt about the heard. The sounds of commercial radio
build a formidable wall, solid and permanent”.42

These conclusions are however not directly translatable to the case of Swedish
broadcasting. The exceptionally late de-monopolization of radio in Sweden delayed
any real commercial concurrence until 1993. Therefore, the effective decline of
silence over the decade cannot be regarded as the result of any direct commercial
influence. Nevertheless, the 1980s is far from a static decade in the history of
Swedish broadcasting. The legislative permission for commercial radio in 1993 can
rather be understood as just one step in the instigation of competition within the
medium. The market-liberal ideas prevalent in Europe throughout the second half of
the 20th century also caught attention within Swedish broadcasting. The company
behind the broadcasting monopoly, Sveriges Radio, faced accusations of hampering
the natural development of the medium.43 The plea for competition was further
121

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

motivated by the struggle for Radio to maintain footing in the intermedial struggle
against television. Thus, the idea of competition as a beneficial, and sometimes
necessary component in culture was not foreign to the Swedish discourse.44

Media Scholar Michael Forsman has proposed that the process can be understood as
two succedent stages, with each solution corresponding to the political leadership in
Sweden at the time. The proper commercialization of radio in the 90s constitutes
from this perspective the later step in the development, determined by the more
distinctly liberal government at the time.45 However, the social democratic party had
already provided their response to the matter, 15 years earlier. Instead of introducing
the commercial forces, this approach decentralized broadcasting by installing
competition within the sphere of the public service monopoly. Alternative channels
were established alongside the flagship P1. The second channel, P2, was instigated
back in 1955, and functioned principally as a source for classical music, together
with educational segments. A decade later, Sveriges Radio introduced a third
alternative, P3, which at the time was conceived as yet another complementary
channel, focusing largely on popular music.46 Whilst P2 remained a marginal option
for the radio audience, P3 grew rapidly in popularity, and by the 1980s it was cause
for loud concerns at the Swedish Radio. Towards the mid-1980s, P3 had an
estimated audience of 67 percent of the population, against a waning 13 percent
sported by P1.47 P3 was not in a strict sense a commercial competitor, however, these
concerns mirrored many of the tropes from British radio history. The growing
imbalance in listeners between the flagship P1, and the popular entertainment
alternative, was conceived as a threat to culture.48 The critique against P3 actualized
the pejorative features of tap listening. It was seen as antithetical to cultural
education, instead of providing the youth with a fast-paced, undemanding stream of
popular music.
122

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Keeping with the spirit of decentralization, the Swedish government ruled in favor
of local radio production in 1978. The consequence was, not just a third, or fourth
alternative, but an upsurge of regional alternatives. By 1984, more than 20 local
channels were transmitting parallelly, and beyond that, hundreds of communal radio
stations ha had popped up across Sweden.49 Research into Swedish media history
has located this to be the defining onset of the disintegration of the radio monopoly.50
Local radio came to influence the ether. Yet, as Birgitta Höijer has pointed out in her
research on radio history, the local was at the same time the global.51 Looking to the
British radio for inspiration, these new broadcasting initiatives immediately assumed
a more international style of broadcasting. This entailed the introduction of
production tools like stopwatches and commercial jingles, rendering a type of
broadcasting that less and less resembled the classic public service radio. In order to
win back the audience, the flagship had to adapt. Forsman has shown how this
pressure brought about heated debates within the profession, which in turn can be
tied directly to the matter of silence. P1 needed to be “modernized”.52 The debate
revolved around the issue of the programming structure. The older producercontrolled approach was challenged by the effective block system. Radio needed to
become “more uniform and predictable”. Yet, we ought to yield careful attention
when we consider the cause for this development. As been argued by scholars like
Jane Feuer, media studies ought not to conflate the historical factors behind
commercial broadcasting with media history in general.53
The “modernization” debate, which ran throughout the second half of the 1980s have
been granted varying significance in earlier historical scholarship. In Lennart
Weibull’s work on the grand history of Swedish broadcasting, the actual change is
conceived to be limited to the role of music on channel 1. 54 In contrast, Forsman’s
account considers the effects on a more structural level, proposing general increase
123

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

in uniformity.55 The following analysis provides granular examination of the signal
value of the actual broadcasting, in order the return to these questions by studying
the radio data, instead of textual accounts.

Analysis

Figure 4: The rhythm of average relative silence during broadcasting hours 06:00 until 22:00 for 1980 and 1989.
Each data point corresponds to a 10-minute window for which the relative amount of silence is presented. Despite
the overall lower frequency of the orange curve, corresponding to 1989, the graph displays intriguing similarities in
rhythm. The timestamps for decrease and increase in the distribution of silence appear to correspond. This
correspondence will be further perused in the following graphs.

This graph is a representation of the silence rhythm of the entire broadcasting day,
displayed as percentage of silence within 10 minutes segments. The yearly average
124

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

in the sample data from 1980 and 1989 are plotted parallelly by visual tools provided
in python, with added packages. The visualization allows for several noteworthy
interpretations. First of all, Max Picard might perhaps have been too hasty when he
diagnosed the extinction of silence already in 1948. There are measurable amounts
of silence in broadcasting still occurring towards the end of the 1980s – at least in
Sweden. Yet, it is a clear discrepancy between the start and the end of the decade.
The orange curve, corresponding to data from 1989, remains below the value from
the 1980, drawn in blue, with only a few exceptions. Regarded from the perspective
of international radio history, the results seem to confirm an established tendency.
The reduction of silence demonstrated by the results can thus be understood as part
of a larger development towards the minimization of silence, and seem to align with
what prior research has hypothesized in regards to the Anglo-American context.

There is however another interesting aspect to the graph. Due to the general
difference in frequency, the two curves rarely overlap, yet the graph seems to
indicate correspondence on a structural level. It is possible to identify several
cooccurrences in fluctuation, especially throughout the second half of the day. These
signs seem to point towards a shared configuration of silences throughout the day.
Despite the diminishing amount of silence, the graph still displays clear moments of
alignment. This begs the question of the general level of similarity within the data
set.

125

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

Figure 5: Principal components analysis (PCA) of the rhythm of silence. Each data point corresponds to a sampled
day, the principal components have been computed from the proportion of silence during each 10-minute window as
variables, as demonstrated in the prior graph. X and y-axes are two variant approximations of the trends in the total
data. Components clustering closer to each other are more similar and those that cluster closer to the origin have
less deviation from the overall mean.

Figure 5 displays the statistical correspondence in the data according to principal
component analysis. The computation confirms a high level of similarity between
the data points. The only noteworthy exception within the data is “1983-06-20” to
the far right, which breaks with overall tendency, indicating significantly higher
values of silence. The explanation for this is a scheduled broadcasting pause
appearing this day, resulting in a longer silent pause before noon.56 Altogether, the
graphs demonstrate a significant and intriguing similarity in rhythm. The following
part of the analysis investigates the plausibility and causality of these reoccurring

126

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

rhythms of silence, through the overall uniformity in programming structure, the
specific similarity in broadcasting content, and finally, the validity of the data.

As discussed in the prior section, discursive records from the mid 1980s contain
evidence of controversy in regards to the question of broadcasting standards. The
sample data in this study indicate that the advocates of a more modern radio had an
impact on the actual content of radio at the time. The program schedule
accompanying the radio recordings document the gradual reorganization of content.
Toward the latter half of the decade, there is evidence supporting the shift to block
structure programming proposed by Forsman. Content came to be thematically
arranged over larger sections of time. However, within these block sections, the
sheer number of separate segments tends to increase. Between 1980 and 1989, there
was an increase from an average of 2,5 to 3,7 programs per hour. The transformation
to block structure thus resulted in more separate shows, despite a decrease in silence.
This indicates that the number of separate shows does not, with necessity, determine
the amount of silence. If the substantial quantity of silence was depending on the
pauses between segments, an increase in the number of shows would likely have
produced the same effect on silence. Furthermore, considering these extensive
changes in schedule structure, programming alone does not provide a satisfactory
explanation for the similarity in the rhythm of silence.

127

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

Figure 6: Rhythm of silence, aligned with content of broadcasting on singular days. The graphs display data from
Monday and Tuesday from 1980 and 1989 respectively. Purple nodes correspond to content with explicit news
orientation. Orange nodes correspond to music content. Green nodes make up the remaining mixture of programs.

The second variable of interest is the content of the broadcast. If the shows were to
remain similar, only with slightly shifted time slots, this would provide an
explanation for the similarity in the frequency of silence. Figure 6 aligns the program
structure with the data from the Monday and Tuesday from the first and last sample
week in the data set. These graphs provide insight into the greater variation of silence
throughout the first half of the day. As indicated by the orange markers, morning
radio in 1980 contained significantly more musical content, which in turn seems to
heavily influence the frequency of silence. As displayed in the two upper graphs in
figure 6, the low frequency of silence in the first hours of the day corresponds to
specific musical segments. As has been argued by prior research, one of the early
effects of the emergence of local radio was a migration of music content from P1, to
the other channels.57 The effects of the migration of music can clearly be identified
in the frequency of silence. Orange markers tend to be followed by a steep decrease
in silence, which seems intuitive considering the different functions of silence within
music. Thus, the reorganization of musical content throughout the first part of the

128

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

day can account partially for the variation in rhythm between 1980 and 1989.
Besides this tendency, however, there are no clear trends between the specific
content and the frequency of silence. Explicitly news-oriented segments exhibit no
more a clear tendency than the thematically diverse elements merged under the
“Misc”-tag. Both tags are followed by drastic increases and decreases in silence
interchangeably. The 08:00 o’clock news, which on Monday causes a reduction of
silence, has the opposite effect the next day.

A number of shows do remain in the same time slot throughout the decade. A longer
news segment appears at the same time, 12:30, in almost all broadcasting data. There
are also three shorter news segments, each between two and five minutes in length,
occurring at 08:00, at 15:00, and at 21:00. Similarly, a five minutes long weather
report reoccurs three times every day, at 06:00, at 13:00, and 18:00. These unvarying
elements do affect the rhythm of silence. Yet, the total amount of time, in particular
throughout the second part of the day, only constitutes a subsidiary factor amongst
the many hours of data. Taking the above-mentioned unpredictability of the effect
into consideration, the consistency in content proves unsatisfying as an explanation
for the similarity in the rhythm of silence. Thus, beyond the clear effect of music,
the content of the program appears an equally insufficient variable for explaining the
overlap in pattern throughout the second half of the day.

129

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

Figure 7: Deviation from average in proportion of silence. The average rhythm of silence is plotted in dark blue and
the shaded region corresponds to the minimum and maximum proportion of silence. The graphs display data from
every third year throughout the decade, from top to bottom: 1980, 1983, 1986, and 1989 .

The rhythm of silence thus seems to display a certain degree of autonomy in regards
to the radio content and programming. This calls for a closer investigation of the
data itself. Figure 7 displays the rhythm of silence for each separate year, plotted
against the deviation from average. From a methodological perspective, this
visualization draws attention to the limitations of the generalizing method applied in
the analysis. The considerable variation displayed between 09:00 and 13:00 in the
first graph demonstrates the degree to which the method generalizes occasionally
highly heterogeneous data. However, these graphs also display occasions of
noteworthy similarity in the data. The almost exact overlap in both of the upper
graphs occurring prior 13:00 and 17:00 are examples of strong correspondence,
redeeming the accuracy of the method. It is possible to conclude that, despite being
reductive in character, the analysis still provides insight into the high congruence
within the data.

Studying the deviation from average, however, also provides significant indications
130

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

in regards to the historical development. By comparing the variance in data
throughout the decade, it is possible to elucidate a difference in uniformity within
the rhythm of silence. In figure 7, the minor deviation from average in sample week
1989 poses a strong contrast to the large shaded regions in the data from 1980. The
two sample weeks between, 1983 and 1986, seem to indicate a gradual development
towards a higher degree of homogeneity. This tendency is also confirmed by the
PCA analysis in Figure 8, where the later sample weeks cluster closer to the middle
of the graph.

Figure 8: Principal components of proportion of silence averaged over days in each sampled week. The opaque
data points, corresponding to later years, cluster towards the zero point of the graph, indicating less diversion from
average.

131

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

These results are a compelling indication that the deviation decreases over the
decade, in a manner that brings to mind Crisell’s observation that radio had to
become more “uniform” and “predictable”.58 This is also similar to what Schafer
proposed concerning North American commercial radio, already back in 1977. In
his prediction, each station would keep on forming increasingly “tight little loops
throughout the day”.59 Radio time needed to be managed with precision and silence
needed to exist under controllable circumstances. If a producer were to impulsively
leave room for another seven seconds of mediational silence, as encouraged by
Filson Young in the 1930s, the decision would have direct consequence in the
packed tabloid schedule. The consequence is that the very programming and
formatting of the medium influenced both the amount and the regularity of silence.
The results presented in my study does not only appear to confirm these
hypothesizes, but they also demonstrate how this style of broadcasting had influence
beyond the realm of American commercial broadcasting. Prior research on the
history of Swedish radio has located similar tendencies in the new local radio
channels which appeared on the air throughout the 1980s. These small-scale radio
stations adopted strategies from commercial broadcasting, like the use of regular
jingles and clocks.60 However, due to their size, their influence on the flagship P1
has not been accentuated. Nevertheless, the increasingly more similar rhythm of
silence throughout the P1 broadcasting day provides evidence that the new style was
spreading throughout the public service monopoly, quicker than previously
documented.

Exploring the frequency of silence has thus rendered insights into the development
of P1 broadcasting. Yet, in regards to the general similarities exhibited in the data,
neither programming structure, nor the content of broadcasting provide an
exhaustive explanation. Instead, these silence rhythms seem to display a certain
132

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

autonomy in their consistency. Such autonomy is good reason to further consider the
function of silence as a crucial element in composing the form of radio.

Conclusion
“Historians will always insist that there is no unmediated access to the past. But
as the negative sound of the archive, silence is the truest articulation of times
past.”61

As Wolfgang Ernst argues in his latest book, Sonic Time Machines, the historian
needs to become attentive to the significance of ‘negative sound’. In order to provide
a scientific and methodological response to such a demand, this article has evoked
the informational value of silence. By exploring both changes and similarities in the
frequency of silence in P1 broadcasting, two distinct contributions to the
understanding of media history can be made. Not only do the results confirm a clear
and gradual decrease in silence, but the data also indicates a tendency towards a
more homogenous rhythm of silence, suggesting more rigidly formalized content.
Read against the backdrop of prior radio historical research, these results provide
further knowledge on the question concerning the style of public service
broadcasting towards the end of state monopoly. Whether the modernization of radio
necessitated a more uniform program structure is a debated matter. My research
provides new insights into how increased competition and ideas of modernization
came to influence the very content of radio. The gradual increase in structural
similarity does not only confirm Crisell’s and Murray’s suggestions that radio
becomes more predictable, but it also demonstrates that this development took place
beyond the realm of commercial radio. The extent to which my results align with
prior historical estimations is also interesting from a methodological perspective.

133

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

Whilst this lessens the novelty of the results, it simultaneously grants credibility to
the method. Today, the ever-increasing amount of audio data at the disposal for
media and cultural studies calls for new approaches to the study of sound. By turning
the attention to the audio signal and the rhythmic redistribution of silence within the
several hours of data at the time, it was possible to both discover new results, as well
as anchor the conclusions in prior research. In doing so, my research affirms the
media archeological interest in the signal, suggested by Ernst, and points forward to
the potential of digital signal processing as a method within the humanities. By
studying the very signal from a structural perspective, new answers are provided to
old questions.

By putting the question to silence itself, this study has managed to validate a
correspondence between a homogenization of rhythm and the decentralization of
radio, as it took place in Sweden. The results both support the effectivization thesis
and offer new perspectives on the role of silence on radio. Nevertheless, many of the
conclusions would do well to be tested on different, and larger data sets. This
highlights the prospect of future comparative research. It would be highly interesting
to contrast the changes and factors between broadcasting in the different countries.
The study also constitutes a reminder that sound data remains both an obstacle and
a resource. The very materiality of the documents has posed concrete limitations to
the scope of this research. The data has furthermore required quite considerable
manual cleaning and has been juridically difficult to access. These matters retain the
prospects of media studies, yet, it is also a reminder that all archival documents have
their own history and politics. The archive is and has always been an economic
structure. The state and accessibility of the remnants of the past are subject to matters
of prioritization.

134

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

These are interesting times for any media scholar sensitive to sound. The
significance and potential of the accumulation of sound media, both in classical
archives and in digital infrastructures, has only been scratched on its resonant
surface. The possibility of large-scale signal processing enables new ways to
understand the deep structure of sound media. No longer is it necessary to manually
code every single minute of radio in order to study its form. Instead, as I have tried
to demonstrate, audio data can be explored by simple computational methods. The
means to extract information from the vast residue of the sonic past potentially
changes the conditions for historical knowledge. This is a valuable insight both
within and outside media studies. In this regard, the article offers only a small
addition. Yet, the ambition is to make a contribution which extends beyond the
specific historical topic, inspiring future excursions into the unexplored realm of
digital audio. Today, there are no clear boundaries or rules for the study of sound
within humanities. Rather, it is up to attuned researchers to develop the proper
techniques and discover the possibilities of audio data.

Notes
Kjellberg, Anders, “The Great Conflict of 1980 and other major labour conflicts in Sweden”. (”Arbetarhistoria:
meddelande från arbetarrörelsens arkiv och bibliotek”, Vol. 35, No. 138-139, 2011), pp. 33-40.
1

2

Ibid.

3

Crisell, Andrew, Understanding Radio, (Routledge, 1986): 3.

4

See: Lacey, Kate, Listening Publics (Polity press, 2013) and Voegelin, Salome, Listening to Noise and Silence
(Bloomsbury, New York, 2010).
5

Elgemyr, Göran, Radion i strama tyglar, (Etermedierna Sverige, 1996), p. 225.

6

Hadenius, Stig, Weibull, Lennart, och Wadbring, Ingela, Massmedier: press, radio och tv i den digitala tidsåldern,
(Ekerlider: Stockholm, 2008): 96.
7

Djerf-Pierre, Monika, Weibul Lennart, Spegla, granska, tolka: Aktualistetsjournalistik i svensk radio och TV under
1900-talet, (Prisma förlag, 2001): 38.
Brylawski, Samuel, “Preservation of Digitally Recorded Sound”, in Building a National Strategy for Digital
Preservation: Issues in Digital Media Archiving, (CLIR and Library of Congress, 2002).
8

135

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

9

According to the legal deposit register at the International Association of Sound and Audiovisual Archives, IASA,
”Audiovisual Legal Deposit register”, June 21, 2021, https://www.iasa-web.org/legal-deposit/register.
10

See Williams, Raymond, Television: Technology and Cultural Form, (Routledge, 2003/1974). The link between
silences and flow in communicative content has more recently been pointed out by Shammur Absar Chowdhury et.
al, see; Chowdhury, Shammur Absar, Stepanov, Evgeny, Danieli, Morena, Riccardi, Giuseppe, "Functions of
Silences towards Information Flow in Spoken Conversation" in Proceedings of the Workshop on Speech-Centric
Natural Language Processing (Association for Computational Linguistics, Copenhagen, 2017”).
11

Ibid

12

Schafer, R. Murray, The Tuning of the World, (New York: Knopf, 1977): 93.

13

Ibid

Ernst, Wolfgang, “Radical Media Archaeology (its Epistemology, Aesthetics and Case Studies)” (Artnodes, Num.
21, July 2018):3, and Ernst, Wolfgang, Digital Memory and the Archive, (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2012):45.
14

Åberg, Carin, “Radio analysis? Sure! But how?”, (Radio-Kultur und Hör-Kunst:Zwischen Avantgarde und
Poplarkultur 1923-2000, Königsh./Neum., Würzb, 2001).
15

16

Ibid.

Poulsen, Ib, “Carin Åberg: The sounds of Radio. On radio as an auditive means of communication”
(MedieKultur: Journal of Media and Communication Research, 17(33), 2001).
17

18

Åberg, Carin, The Sound of Radio, (Stockholm University Press, 1999).

19

Kittler, Freidrich, The Truth of the Technological World (Stanford University Press, 2014): 178.

20

In conversation analysis, it is common to use 500 milliseconds as a threshold for silence, but following the work
of Lynch et. al on the lengths of silences within speech, my intention has been to captured the some of the more
significant silence within dialogue as well. Further reading: Lynch JF, Josenhans LJ, Crochiere RE, ”Speech/Silence
Segmentation for Real-Time Coding via Rule Based Adaptive Endpoint Detection”, IEEE International Conference
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP-87, Dallas 1987), pp. 1348 -1351.
21

https://lagen.nu/1966:756

22

IASA, ”Audiovisual Legal Deposit register”, June 21, 2021, https://www.iasa-web.org/legal-deposit/register.

Snickars, Pelle, ”Mediestudiets infrastruktur: Om etableringen av Arkivet för ljud och bild” (Massmedieproblem:
Mediestudiets formering, ed. Mats Hyvönen, Pelle Snickars, Per Vesterlund, Lunds universitet: 2015).
23

24

The results would nonetheless have benefited from exhaustive data, but due to complex legal status of radio
recordings, this was not possible. The method proposed in this article is time effective when applied to digital
documents. However, due to the current implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation, access has been
compromised, which in turned has necessitated live analyses
25

https://aubio.org/

“Audacity Team (2021). Audacity(R): Free Audio Editor and Recorder [Computer application]. Version 3.0.0
retrieved March 17th 2021 from https://audacityteam.org/ [1].”
26

136

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

Rogalsky, Matt “Maintain radio silence: listening to the gaps between the words 2000–2003”, (Digital Creativity,
14:2, 2003), pp. 115-118: 116.
27

28

Picard, Max, Die Welt des Schweigens, (Piper Verlag, 1991/1948): 207.

29

Mowitt, John, “Radio Silence; or, ON the Fritz” (Cultural Critique, vol. 91:150, 2015): 159, and Lacey, 2013.

30

Lacey, 2013: 89.

31

Djerf-Pierre, Monika, Weibull Lennart, Spegla, granska, tolka: Aktualistetsjournalistik i svensk radio och TV
under 1900-talet (Prisma förlag, 2001): 38.
For the moniker “first media man”, see: Mazzarella, Sylvester, Filson Young: The First Media Man (1876 –
1938), 2017.
32

33

Lacey, Kate, Listening Publics, (Polity Press, 2013).

34

Williams, Raymond, Television: Technology and Cultural Form, (Routledge, 2003/1974): 90.

White, Mimi, “Flows and Other Close Encounters with Television,” in Planet TV.A Global Television Reader, ed.
Lisa Parks and Shanti Kumar (New York: New York Press, 2003).
35

36

Eastman, Susan T, Ferguson, Douglas A, Klein, Robert, Media Promotion & Marketing for Broadcasting, Cable
& the Internet (Routledge, 2006): 128.
37

Robert Paul Dye, “The death of silence” (Journal of Broadcasting, 12:3, 2009/1968), pp. 225-228: 225.

38

Scannell, Paddy, “Radio Times: The Temporal Arrangements of Broadcasting in the Modern World”, (1986): 21.

British Broadcasting Corporation, “Broadcasting in the Seventies: the B.B.C.’s plan for network radio and nonmetropolitan broadcasting”, (B.B.C., 1969): 1.
39

40

Crisell, 1986: 32.

Ruohomaa, Erja. “Radio as a (Domestic) Medium Towards New Concepts of the Radio Medium” (Nordicom,
1997), pp. 151 - 160.
41

42

Voegelin, 2010: 114.

Forsman, Michael, ”Radio för framtiden eller bildning i förfall? Debatterna kring moderniseringen av tablåer och
tilltal i Riksradions P1 1966-1986” (Presshistorisk Årsbok, 2014), pp, 71-84: 119.
43

44

Forsman, Michael, Lokal radio i konkurrens 1975 – 2010, (Ekerlids, 2010): 13.

45

Forsman, 2010: 46.

46

Hadenius, Stig, Weibull, Lennart, och Wadbring, Ingela, Massmedier: press, radio och tv i den digitala
tidsåldern, (Ekerlider: Stockholm, 2008): 100 – 102.
47

Höijer, Birgitta, Det hörde vi allihop!: etermedierna och publiken under 1900-talet (Prisma: Stockholm, 1998):
244.
48

Forsman, 2014: 86.

49

Höijer, 1998: 238.

137

RHYTHMS OF SILENCE: DIGITAL AUDIO ANALYSIS OF SWEDISH RADIO BROADCASTING, 1980 -1989

50

Engblom, Lars-Åke, Radio- och TV-folket: Rekryteringen av programmedarbetare till radion och televisionen i
Sverige, 1925-1995, (Stiftelsen Etermedierna Sverige, 1998): 178, and Höijer, 1998: 238.
51

Höijer, 1998: 240.

52

Forsman, 2014: 75.

Feuer, Jane, “The Concept of Live Television: Ontology as Ideology,” in E. Ann Kaplan,
ed. Regarding Television (Los Angeles: American Film Institute, 1983): 12-22.
53

54

Hadenius, Weibull, Wadbring, 2008: 101.

55

Forsman, 2014: 74.

56

Scheduled broadcasting pauses are a rare phenomenon. Throughout the decade, there are 103 noted occurrences,
with the majority taking place in the first half of the decade.
57

Hadenius, Weibull, Wadbring, 2008: 101.

58

Crisell, 1986: 32.

59

Schafer, 1977: 235.

60

Forsman, 2010: 117.

61

Ernst, Wolfgang, Sonic Time Machines (Amsterdam University Press, 2016): 119.

138

