Journal of
Cultural Analytics

May 24, 2022

What We Learned About the Humanities
from a Study of Thousands of
Newspaper Articles
Lindsay Thomas, Abigail Droge
Lindsay Thomas, University of Miami
Abigail Droge, Purdue University

How might a computational analysis of the humanities in public discourse inform
future efforts in humanities education and research? This question motivates this
short essay; here, we reflect on key arguments from our longer article “The
Humanities in Public: A Computational Analysis of US National and Campus
Newspapers” with an eye toward imagining possible use cases and applications for
our findings. After summarizing our main claims, we suggest ways of reframing or
revaluing advocacy for the humanities based on this research. These include
delineating concrete examples of the relationship between humanistic knowledge
and the public interest, shifting institutional and disciplinary priorities toward forms
of labor that engage a wider variety of publics, and understanding the connections
between, rather than focusing on competition among, the humanities and the
sciences.
“The Humanities in Public” explores how the humanities are discussed in a corpus
of over 147,000 articles published from 1998-2018 in 624 mainstream national and
college campus newspapers. This is a subset of the data collected by
“WhatEvery1Says: The Humanities in Public Discourse” (WE1S), a collaborative
project led by PI Alan Liu, funded by the Mellon Foundation, and involving over
one hundred participants.1 In tracking this discussion, we are interested not in any
one particular definition of the humanities, nor are we interested in providing our
own definition of the humanities. Rather, we are interested in observing the many
different and often surprising contexts in which the term “humanities” appears,
contexts we might miss if we decided in advance to focus on a particular definition
of the term. In examining these associations, we seek to understand how the term is
used in everyday contemporary newspaper discourse and consider what these uses
can tell us about wider resonances of the concept of the humanities.

Journal of Cultural Analytics 7.1 (2022): 139-144

HOPE FOR T HE HUMANI T IE S

When we began working on this analysis, we expected to find that articles about
science or scientific research appear more frequently in both mainstream and campus
newspapers than articles about the humanities or humanistic research. This is true;
our corpus includes about four times as many articles about science as it does articles
about the humanities. However, when we examined articles about the humanities
more closely and compared them to articles about science, we were surprised to find
that humanities scholarship, when it does appear in newspapers, is often
communicated in different ways than the results of scientific research or more
general scientific information. While newspaper articles tend to communicate
scientific research directly to newspaper readers – consider common headline
formulations such as “Researchers discover…”, “Scientists find…”, or “Studies
show…” – they tend to embed discussions of humanities research in descriptions of
classes or events such as talks by humanities scholars. In our article, we call this a
“double layer of communication”: humanistic knowledge is described in these
articles in the process of being conveyed to a group of people. This foregrounding
of an embedded audience, such as students or attendees of a panel discussion, shows
how humanities ideas and fields of study come to life through the mediation and
participation of various publics.
The “event-centered” nature of communication about the humanities runs counter to
the familiar discourse of crisis surrounding discussions of the humanities, a
discourse which humanists tend to see as pervasive. While articles about, for
example, defunding humanities departments or declining majors or the need to
defend the humanities more broadly do show up in our corpus, they make up only
one aspect of public discourse about the humanities as it appears in newspapers.
What’s more, when we consider articles that are not exactly “about” the humanities
but in which the term “humanities” appears – often in incidental ways such as in a
job title or the name of an institute, school, or building – we catch glimpses of an
even more expansive discursive terrain in which the concept of the humanities
operates. In these articles, the term “humanities” is associated with announcements
about and coverage of a wide variety of events such as festivals, public lectures,
performances, summer camps, museum exhibitions, basketball games, weddings,
and funerals. These relatively mundane contexts alert us to the presence of the
humanities in everyday life, a presence which often goes unnoticed or is dismissed
as irrelevant in discussions of the value of the humanities. By appearing in the name
of a building where a poetry reading will take place, or of a foundation where those
mourning someone’s death should send donations in memoriam, or of the nearby
high school, the term “humanities” in these articles indexes individuals’ lived and
often inchoate connections to local communities and institutions.

140

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

How might such findings inform efforts by those, often positioned within institutions
of higher education, who seek to advocate for the humanities and for humanities
scholars and students? First, the observations that we have made about how the
humanities already resonate within public newspaper discourse could be a powerful
tool in informing how humanities scholars and students communicate knowledge
and research. Many faculty professionalization resources, graduate programs, and
undergraduate composition courses focus on writing for public audiences, but they
often do so in a way that is unmoored from a concrete understanding of how current
discourse around the humanities operates at scale. Such efforts to create future public
discourse might therefore be usefully augmented by attention to recent media
landscapes, through studies such as ours.
For example, one thing our corpus reveals is that, in a moment when tangible
takeaways about what it means to engage with the humanities are needed, they are
absent from public discourse. The articles we examine provide abundant evidence
of the everyday impact of humanities knowledge and scholars beyond the walls of
the university, but, as we have discussed, this impact is often implied rather than
directly stated. Those interested in advocating for the humanities should make clear
how an engagement with the specifics of humanistic research and teaching can lead
to desired goals like jobs, the inculcation of civic duty, or the development of
multidisciplinary solutions to social and political problems. In other words,
discourse about the humanities should establish through lines among the diffuse
activities and multiple publics we explore in our article. How, specifically, does an
audience member at a humanities lecture or a student completing their general
education requirements shape the public good? The gaps in the current discursive
landscape register a distinct opportunity for future authors to address such questions.
In our corpus, a sprinkling of articles try their hand at moving from concrete
experiences – like engaging with Othello, Socrates, Michelangelo, or Frederick
Douglass – to taking larger actions, like “commit[ting] … to the service of others,”
“effectively solv[ing] problems,” and grappling with “the deep questions in
life.”2 Such articles scratch the surface of the conversations that are possible.
Second, the forms of humanistic labor and communication that appear most often in
articles about the humanities – like teaching a class, speaking on a panel, or
organizing an event – are those aspects typically least rewarded by academic tenure
and promotion guidelines at many institutions. Direct discussions of humanistic
research are uncommon in the articles we examined, although, as discussed above,
humanities research is sometimes communicated indirectly in these articles. If
institutions of higher education view themselves as responsive to the publics they
serve, then they should both encourage and reward the kinds of impactful
141

HOPE FOR T HE HUMANI T IE S

connections that we see in our corpus between institutions and their local
communities, as evidenced by many articles describing humanities events and
classes. Digital humanists are perhaps uniquely placed to advocate for such changes,
as work such as digitization efforts both engages explicitly with public access and
attention to research and simultaneously calls into question a tenure structure based
on the production of single-author articles and monographs rather than collaborative
or public-facing work.
Third, our findings suggest connections between articles about science and articles
about the humanities and, therefore, ways of reframing advocacy for the humanities
as advocacy for higher education as a whole. Though much of “The Humanities in
Public” focused on chronicling the distinctions and divergences between humanities
discourse and science discourse, it bears emphasis that understanding points of
convergence is just as, if not more, valuable. In our 100-topic model of
approximately 13,000 articles about the humanities and articles about science, we
identified 19 topics where the top 100 articles contributing to each topic included a
mix of articles about the humanities and articles about science.3 Budgets and funding
are an important point of intersection between these kinds of articles. For example,
both articles about the humanities and articles about science announce opportunities
for research grants and funding and celebrate those who have received them (topic
34). These articles also describe and warn against budget cuts: articles that contribute
to topic 53, which we labeled “Funding and Budgeting,” report on federal, state, and
university funding across the humanities and sciences. Whether they are about
proposed cuts to the National Endowment for the Humanities, shutting down
satellites needed for climate research, shuttering long-running labs or departments,
or slashes to the research budget at the National Institute of Health, these articles
present a view of both the humanities and the sciences – indeed, of basic research as
a whole – in a shared state of financial precarity. In a time of seemingly everdecreasing public support for higher education, the fate of the humanities cannot be
so cleanly separated from the fate of the sciences (or the social sciences). Those who
wish to advocate for the humanities can strengthen their arguments by reframing the
crisis in the humanities as a need to support the liberal arts and knowledge
production more generally.
The energy and excitement surrounding both scientific and humanistic knowledge
that many articles in our corpus convey could further galvanize such advocacy
efforts. Articles contributing to a topic on college majors (12), for example, recount
“the benefits of double majoring” and emphasize efforts like a “collaborative major
in neuroscience and behavior” or “an interdisciplinary major designed to give
students the opportunity to study medicine and science from a humanistic point of
142

J OURNAL OF CU LTURAL A NALYTICS

view.”4 Articles associated with a topic on human life and meaning (70) weigh the
existential questions – about the soul, about consciousness, and about the “wonder
and fascination” of human endeavor – that arise at the bleeding edge of scientific
discovery, technological development, and humanistic inquiry.5 Pieces contributing
to topic 51, labeled “Film, Media, and Television,” discuss cinematic representations
of science and describe interdisciplinary partnerships like a “Science on Screen
series.”6 And a topic about the arts (27), in which the top 100 articles are split evenly
between those about the humanities and those about science, gathers together articles
portraying interdisciplinary artistic expression. These articles celebrate efforts such
as a gallery exhibit that presents “a fusion of science and abstract art” and a musical
performance that centers new instruments created by engineering students.7 These
are just a small sampling of those articles describing the wide variety of programs
and events related both to the humanities and to science sponsored by and happening
in many colleges, universities, and communities across the country every day.
Together, they show not only that many already understand the humanities and the
sciences as intimately connected, but also that audiences interested in these
connections already exist and could be cultivated more directly.8
If there is one thing our study of public discourse about the humanities has taught
us, it is that those who seek to promote the value of humanistic study and teaching
and to continue such activities into the future have many reasons to hope. While the
view from within academia in the United States, at least, seems increasingly bleak,
public discussion of and around the humanities in US newspapers is surprisingly
energetic and positive. As we read articles across our corpus, several stood out to us
as guiding lights, calling for an “intentional strategy” that will “make the humanities
invaluable” by “join[ing] forces” across fields, embracing community engagement
“as essential for the long-term health and revitalization of the humanities,”
emphasizing that there is no “crisis of interest in the humanities,” and recasting our
current moment as “an opportunity to redefine how the humanities are taught and
learned.”9 On the whole, our data suggest that people value and continue to seek out
encounters with humanistic knowledge and ideas. Whatever forms advocacy for the
humanities and higher education takes, this is an important starting point.

Notes
1

More information about the WhatEvery1Says project at large, including methods, findings, recommendations, and
the names of our fellow collaborators can be found at https://we1s.ucsb.edu/. “The Humanities in Public” provides a
fuller sense of how the key claims summarized here intersect with the work of the larger project. For further

143

HOPE FOR T HE HUMANI T IE S

discussion, see also Alan Liu, Abigail Droge, Scott Kleinman, Lindsay Thomas, Dan C. Baciu and Jeremy Douglass,
“What Everyone Says: Public Perceptions of the Humanities in the Media,” Daedalus 151.3 (Summer 2022),
forthcoming. We wish to thank all of the participants who contributed to this project over many years.
2

These examples can be observed in prominent articles associated with Topic 22 of our 100-topic model of
collection 33, available at http://harbor.english.ucsb.edu:10002/collections/20200515_1455_us-classificationresults-top-newspapers-universitywire-hum-sci/dfr-browser/topics100/. See Joel Kirk, “Dear CMC: An Admonition
Comments,” The Student Life: Pomona College, September 20, 2013; Nicole Felkins, “Editorial: Humanities are
what makes us human,” The Pacifican: University of the Pacific, November 6, 2014.
See the dictionary for collection 33 in our article’s supplementary data (located in “data.tgz” in the “tables”
directory) for a full list of these topics and for more information about them. As we discuss in our article, we
identified 12 topics as those with the highest concentrations of top articles that our classifier categorized as being
about the humanities, and 69 topics as those with the highest concentrations of top articles that our classifier
categorized as being about science. Topics with high concentrations of top documents about the humanities or
science are those in which at least 80 of the top 100 articles were categorized by our classifier as being about the
humanities or about science.
3

Amanda Cruz, “You can have it all, and more,” The California Aggie: University of California, Davis, October 17,
2016; Catherine Owers, “Notre Dame announces new major,” The Observer: University of Notre Dame, October 02,
2014; Catherine Palmer, “New major combines multiple disciplines,” The Johns Hopkins News-Letter: Johns
Hopkins University, January 29, 2015.
4

Mindy Perkins, “When robots moonwalk: The value in human experience,” The Stanford Daily: Stanford
University, June 01, 2015.
5

6

Layla Siraj, “The Science of ‘Spinal Tap,’” The Harvard Crimson: Harvard University, March 12, 2013.

Morgan Mackey, “Gallery blends creativity and science,” UCD Advocate: University of Colorado Denver, August
27, 2014; Gray Christie, “STEM Arts concert will feature instruments made by students,” The Dartmouth:
Dartmouth College, May 04, 2017.
7

See also Amy Windham, “The media uses the humanities as boundary-crossing frameworks to help the public
understand science and technology,” WhatEvery1Says, accessed December 11, 2021, https://we1s.ucsb.edu/wpcontent/uploads/KF-5-18.pdf, and Abigail Droge and Helen Foley, “Student journalists see positive opportunities for
interdisciplinary collaboration between the sciences and the humanities,” WhatEvery1Says, accessed December 11,
2021, https://we1s.ucsb.edu/wp-content/uploads/KF-8-5.pdf. Several of the recommendations of the WE1S team
also focus on fostering interdisciplinary relationships: see https://we1s.ucsb.edu/recommendations/key-call-toaction-recommendations/.
8

Richard Scheines, “Letter to the Editor: Humanities at CMU are healthy, and will grow,” The Tartan: Carnegie
Mellon University, December 2, 2018; Christopher Burns, “UMaine elevates humanities through community
engagement,” The Maine Campus: University of Maine, March 31, 2014; Gary Gutting, “The Real Humanities
Crisis,” The New York Times Blogs, November 30, 2013; Jonathan Mah, “Coping with decline in humanities
majors,” The State Press: Arizona State University, November 7, 2013.
9

144

