Salgaro, Massimo. “Literary Value in the Era of Big Data. Operationalizing Critical
Distance in Professional and Non-Professional Reviews.” Journal of Cultural Analytics,
vol. 7, no. 2, June 2022, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.36446.

ARTICLE

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance
in professional and non-professional reviews
Massimo Salgaro1
1 University of Verona

Keywords: user generated content, social media, literature, literary value, readers, reading, fans
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.36446

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 7, Issue 2, 2022

New phenomena such as digital social reading, instapoets, and the “rating
culture” expressed in online reviews challenge traditional literary criticism in
newspapers and journals. Millions of reviews on platforms such as Amazon or
Goodreads are part of this culture of participation and a counterweight to
professional criticism. At the same time, successful instapoets such as Rupi Kaur
reject the expertise of the gatekeepers of “prestigious literary circles” and try to
establish a direct connection with readers. The aim of this paper is to build the
proper methodological framework to capture these changes in the current literary
system. To do this, the phenomenon of online reviewing has to be contextualized
within the history and the praxis of assigning literary value to literary texts, the socalled canonization. In addition, literary theory needs to be able to analyze
quantitative data and to integrate numbers into its models (engaging in a
procedure that is called operationalization).

1. The quantitative mentality and rating culture
Johannes Franzen describes the phenomenon of massive online reviewing in
which thousands of users publish product reviews over a short period of time.
Such reviews can become a dangerous “review bomb” when a product or
service receives a large number of negative reviews at once. One striking
example involves the bomb “launched” by thousands of gamers against the
videogame The Last of Us Part II. In this controversy, as reconstructed by
Franzen, professional and non-professional critics clashed over two different
assessment criteria (Franzen 2). The difference was also quantitative: 121
professional reviews versus feedback from 152,219 non-professionals. Critics
of the game expressed their mistrust of professional reviews and demanded to
participate in the evaluation procedure.
Clashes between contrasting forms of criticism concern not only many aspects
of our lives but even more “refined” cultural artefacts such as literary texts.
Lay criticism, for example, as it is carried out on platforms such as Amazon or
Goodreads, is one manifestation of a culture of participation. With a record
ninety million reviews, Goodreads may be seen as a counterweight to the
professional criticism that appears in journals and newspapers. Other venues
for amateur literary criticism include book review blogs, websites, online
forums, booktuber channels and #instabook posts.
That the highly subjective and “aesthetic” experience of literary reading can
also be forced into numbers is a recent phenomenon. In The Metric Society
(2019), Stefan Mau discusses the incredible power of “quantitative mentality”

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

in every dimension of social life (Nassehi; Stalder; Reckwitz). According to
Mau, this mentality aims to organize social life by principles of efficiency and
predictability. For Mau, “quantification entails an act of translation” by
reducing “a complex and confusing world to the standardized language of
numbers” (13). We are in a new phase of this process because of the huge
expansion of technologies for collecting, storing, and measuring data in a
digitalized society. “Big Data” include not only shopping lists or professional
performance, but also emotional states, our taste in restaurants and hotels,
health parameters (diet, sleeping, lifestyle), and behavior quantified through
self-tracking tools on smartphones. As Mau points out, humanity now
produces more data in two days than in its entire history up to 2003.
Data have enormous power: In their particular forms of presentation, they “tell
us how to look at things, thereby systematically excluding other perspectives,”
(15) and they always represent a particular form of value assignment.
Quantification also touches diverse psychological mechanisms. As Mau asserts,
“We are natural comparatists” (26) because we want to know whether we are
superior or inferior to others. Data facilitate comparison because they create
a common denominator across a range of dimensions. The result is
“comparability,” as Mau states it, “by applying a common standard to disparate
entities” (31). This nearly infinite comparability, enhanced by our digital lives,
produces a mechanism of “compare and despair” that can have a negative
impact on the mental health of (not only) young people (Royal society for
public health). In fact, quantification produces a correlation between estimated
value and esteem—that is, the social recognition linked to that value. The
notions of “prestige” and “value” occur several times in Mau’s reflections (29,
50, and passim). These notions are important not only in relation to mental
states but also to art and science. In the latter, the number of citations of
a scholar’s output—the so-called h-index or impact factor—is a crucial
parameter in the performance evaluations of scientists or in recently
introduced university rankings.
Rating culture is exploited by social media like Instagram and Facebook as
well. Instagram gives its users three simple measures to show how they are
performing: counts of “followers,” likes on posts, and “engagement” (clicks
on links, comments, and other user behaviors). These feedback scores make
the Instagram experience competitive, emotional, and addictive. Facebook
automatically catalogues its users’ every small action in a similar way.
Knowledge about what people want is crucial to understanding Facebook’s
success, its pervasiveness, and its appeal for advertisers—but it also exposes
pitfalls.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

2. The big data of online reviewers vs. the big names of literary
criticism
Strongly connected to such a “quantitative mentality” is the new phenomenon
of massive internet reviewing. In the literary system, then, we can well claim
that “Today, everyone is a critic” (Mahdawi). In Franzen’s view, the new
tendency of non-professional reviewers in the digital age is to distrust
professional reviews and demand to participate in evaluation procedures.
Franzen, himself a professional literary critic, notes amateurish criticism of
texts on Amazon or Goodreads. As an Amazon-owned, book-based social web
site, Goodreads boasts some ninety million members as well as tens of millions
of reviews and books catalogued; it employs review and rating systems similar
to those on the Amazon website. Goodreads has become the most popular
platform for readers to connect with one another through multiple
opportunities to measure reading performance and text quality: they can list
the books they have read, participate in reading challenges (that is, the number
of books a user intends to read over the course of a year), offer ratings, and post
reviews. On Goodreads, as well as on platforms such as Lovelybooks.de and
Wattpad.com, books can be rated with stars, and the number of reviews and
friend connections of a reviewer can be quantified. As Van Dijk has observed,
in our digital society, evaluation of cultural products has become synonymous
with crowd evaluation.
On websites or in newspapers and magazines, rating culture produces a diverse
range of big data. Quantitative or numerical ratings, for example, may appear
on the websites of book retailers. A “star system” is also used in newspapers.
For example, in “La Lettura,” the cultural page of Corriere della Sera, which
is among the most important newspapers in Italy, professional reviewers rate
three parameters of a text from 1 to 5 stars: the “story,” the “style,” and the
“cover.”
In this context, two different evaluation systems exist. Online comments don’t
express evaluations based on assessed criteria; they are mostly expressions of
consumer satisfaction or dissatisfaction. In relation to these comments,
Gerhard Lauer speaks about a “deconstruction of the hierarchies by popculture” (Lauer, Lesen 157). Consumers become “prosumers” in their digital
lives and defend their right to express judgements. In literary debates, for
example around Peter Handke’s Nobel prize or the publication of the novel
Marianengraben by Jasmine Schreiber, social media played a significant role
and competed with traditional criticism in newspapers and journals. Socialmedia users today refuse to accept the authority of traditional “gatekeepers”
who, in their eyes, follow outdated criteria, opening a debate between
professional and lay readers regarding “Who has the power to establish what is
tasteful and what is not?” (Franzen 14).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

For Moritz Baßler, this controversy brings back the old distinctions between
low- and high-brow culture and between symbolic and economic capital, the
latter of which indirectly reference the works of Pierre Bourdieu, the first to
illustrate the forces and institutions of the “literary field.” Pierre Bourdieu
is surely the twentieth-century thinker who most compellingly described the
logic of the “literary field,” by which he meant “an independent social universe
with its own laws of functioning, its specific relations of force, its dominants
and its dominated” (Bourdieu, Field 163). Far from being characterized by
unselfishness and contemplation, the literary or artistic field is a “field of
struggles” (30). The main value generated by “innumerable struggles between
agents” (authors, actors, writers, critics, directors, publishers, dealers etc.) is the
artistic value or prestige of a literary text (79).
In pre-internet times, the agents that determined symbolic capital in the
literary field controlled not only the social value of a literary text or an author,
but also the categorization of what could be considered “literature” and what
could not. The idea of literature that dominated until the digital age, especially
in the German context, was born in the second half of the nineteenth century,
when differentiations among commercial literature, popular literature, and
high-brow artistic literature were already being made (Bourdieu, Field 192
ff; Neuhaus). Modernist and avant-garde literature, dominated by the idea of
renovation and of rupture with the past, adopted similar concepts. Modernist
literature, in aiming at the status of art, held that literary writing should be
difficult, complex—that is, different from everyday language. The literary
writer, usually poor in economic terms, acquired a high symbolic power
(Bourdieu, Field 15) and a privileged position with reference to the reader.
The writer’s might derived from indifference to the values of society, including
current aesthetic values and public expectations (200). The idea of
“literariness” that emerged in the nineteenth century has largely dominated the
concept of literature in the twentieth and corroborated a notion of a complex
and elitist literature (Salgaro, “Historical Introduction”).
Pierre Bourdieu also recognized the shift in the nineteenth century from the
pre-mass-media age to mass media and the consequent movement from a
concept of literature produced against market imperatives to the imposition of
the sales model when claiming: “Everyone is fixated on ratings. Wherever you
look, people are thinking in terms of market success” (Bourdieu, “Television”
251). With the development of the market, mediators—who include editors,
critics, reviewers, publishers, libraries, and writers in the literary system—have
taken on an increasingly crucial role in the careers of writers. They affect the
economic success of a book or an author but also the evaluation of the work
and the establishment of an author’s reputation. They are the “gatekeepers”
because they decide whether to admit individuals or works into a cultural field.
Gatekeepers in the arts can exercise their function at different stages: publishers
can prevent texts from being published, and critics can foster or impede a text’s
success (Janssen).
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

Reviewing is a social practice attributing social recognition to literary works
that meet certain standards. The selection and valuation of literary texts is
generally presented as personal, in which the intrinsic and “aesthetic”
properties of the texts under consideration are scrutinized. Van Rees has noted
how literary texts, in order to be considered high-quality literature, must pass
through the filters of three distinct types of critics: reviewers, essayists, and
academic critics. Daily reviewers are the first gatekeepers to evaluate a literary
text after publication, but essayists and academic critics have the power to
legitimate the quality of a text and to introduce it into the “canon” (that is, texts
considered representative of a specific nation, culture, or epoch) (403). In this
process of canon formation (Rippl and Winko), many factors and institutions
may join forces: reviewers, publishers, readers, sales figures, film adaptations,
literary prizes, and publication in a particular series or edition. While more
normative canons were the standard in the past (Bloom 10), more descriptive
approaches are now predominant (Rippl and Winko 66–76). Revisionist
debates about the function and nature of canons during recent decades have
encouraged rethinking of traditional concepts of literary prestige from a
political point of view. As a result, more non-Western and non-European
writers, more women, and more writers of popular fiction have been
institutionalized within literary history (P. Löffler 13; Rippl and Winko 82).
A canon therefore arises from an interplay of individual acts that are not
necessarily aimed at canonizing a text. In the thinking of Simone Winko, these
acts involuntarily form an “invisible hand” (Rippl and Winko 73).
In the twenty-first century, the internet has revolutionized the “literary
field”—that is, the reception and production of literary texts. The main
institutions of the literary field have been dismantled and replaced over recent
decades with new agents and institutions, to adopt Bourdieu’s terms. The
“order of the (paper) book” (van der Weel) shifted to an era of digital reading
and writing. Today, books can be read on paper as well as in digital formats
on computers, on eBook readers, and on smartphones. The circulation of
the texts, which has been guaranteed for the last five centuries by publishing
houses, is now also provided by self-publishing. The prestige acquired through
reviews by literary critics in newspapers and journals can now also be obtained
through discussions in blogs and online reading communities such as
Goodreads. As we will see in the following paragraph, the image of the writer as
a quixotic bohemian has been replaced by that of a networked, self-promoting
author on social media. Simultaneously, literary reviews and canonization have
achieved a different status in the digitized world.
Thierry Chervel has provided a longitudinal study of literary reviews on the
most important German journals and newspapers: Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung, Frankfurter Rundschau, Neue Zürcher Zeitung, Süddeutsche Zeitung,
Die Tageszeitung, and Die Zeit. His main result is that, in recent decades, the
number of reviews in these major newspapers has fallen sharply even as review
sections have disappeared, including the feuilleton supplements of the Neue
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

Zürcher Zeitung and Die Zeit. Because Die Zeit is doing brilliantly in economic
terms, the shrinkage of its review and criticism section is an editorial decision
and not an expression of distress (Chervel 297–98).
Chervel also studied the phenomenon of the “Literaturpapst/‘Pope of
Literature’” who, in German public life, is an influential critic who determines
the success or failure of a literary publication. During the twentieth century,
these critics occupied the spotlight—Marcel Reich-Ranicki’s television
program, Das Literarische Quartett, for example, is a more intellectual version
of Oprah Winfrey’s show. At the beginning of the twenty-first century, three
“Popes of Literature” were still alive: Reich-Ranicki, Fritz J. Raddatz, and
Joachim Kaiser.
In his historical reconstruction, Chervel convincingly showed that today, such
agents of the literary field no longer exist and have not been replaced because
newspapers and magazines have lost their power to determine the success of
literary texts (see above). In the past, at least for newspaper readers, the critic
had the last word. For these agents, reviewing was an “incontestable
judgement” (Murray 115). The book critic’s opinion regarding the quality of a
text was unequivocal, and a title was reviewed only once by any given critic. The
internet has democratized reviewing practices by creating space for a multitude
of voices. Both phenomena—the shrinkage of review sections and the death
of the “Popes of Literature”—are consequences of social reading and online
reviewing.
Literary studies adopt a variety of positions regarding these new phenomena.
Most literary scholars still ignore or even demonize them. The big names of
literary criticism try to defend their positions: Sigrid Löffler denounces the
deprofessionalization of online literary criticism disguised as democratization.
She considers professional literary criticism an educational discipline whose
aim is not to give recommendations on book purchases but to judge the literary
quality of the book and possibly also to integrate it into the literary canon.
Professional reviewers such as journalists or literary scholars very often publish
their evaluations online. Digital social reading (Rebora et al.) also shows that
the concept of reader should be revised and substituted with that of “wreader,”
a reader who is also an online writer. For Simone Murray “The existence of
book bloggers further problematizes book reviewers’ liminal status between the
amateur and professional domains” (11) For her:
Social media has certainly rendered reviewing more
democratically accessible and interactive than the traditional
print reviewing paradigm. Yet, contrary to allegations, these
coalescing digital cultural tastemakers are not reducible simply
to the logic of quantification–whereby Internet traffic equates to
cultural worth. We are witnessing the literary critical equivalent
not of an absolute monarchy nor a proletarian revolt, but
something poised ambiguously in between. (Murray 113, 119)
Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

Statistics show that 64% of book purchases in Italy in 2020 were inspired by
social media (Peresson). The users of Twitter and Instagram have expressed
a preference for the kind of literature that can be produced on social media.
That preference resulted in the success of Instapoets and, on Twitter, of the
related phenomenon called “Twitterature.” These genres were born within
social media and did not exist before. Another consequence of the power of
social media is that texts representing these new internet-conceived genres are
now published by traditional publishing houses, sometimes with great success.
Another effect of these communities is that these new literary genres are now
studied by literary scholars (Kreuzmair and Schumacher). Even if we cannot
show that these works will stand “the test of time,” scholarly publications and
interest by literary scholars are clear signs of canonization (Rippl and Winko).
The presence of writers on social media is an international phenomenon that
encompasses such diverse writers as Rupi Kaur, Sarah Berger, Stefanie
Sargnagel, Marco Missiroli, Roberto Saviano, Margaret Atwood, Florian
Meimberg, and many others. And recently, social-media-based literature is also
recognized by awards. In Germany, Stefanie Sargnagel, an author born in social
media, is now published by the renowned Rowohlt-Verlag; in 2016, she
received the Audience Award as part of the Ingeborg Bachmann Prize.
Similarly, Florian Meimberg, a representative of German Twitterature (Salgaro,
“How soon is now?”), published his tweets with S. Fischer Verlag, a major
German publishing house, and received the 2010 Grimme Online Award.
Online reviewing has also changed the way literary texts are rewarded. For
Philipp Ingold, “the only decisive factor is the number of spontaneous votes or
the majority of thumbs up, which are extrapolated as ‘likes,’” even for such an
important award as the Ingeborg Bachmann prize (Ingold).
In Klagenfurt, as elsewhere, the dominance of the lay public,
which is predominant today in the cultural and entertainment
industry, is satisfied (if not to say: shown respect) by awarding a
so-called audience prize, which is exclusively determined by the
criterion of majority approval. A discussion (or just an exchange
of opinions) about the texts to be judged does not take place. The
only decisive factor is the number of spontaneous votes or the
majority of thumbs up, which are extrapolated as ‘likes’. (Ingold)
By analyzing the justifications for awards, Ingold observes that they rarely
go beyond declarations of subjective pleasure, which “makes desolately clear
the extent to which professional criticism, which in Klagenfurt is always
represented by well-known reviewers, has entered into a pact with the power of
the non-professional public” (Ingold).
The evaluation of formal and experimental components of literary texts is
neglected in favor of more emotional feedback (Martens et al.). For these new
evaluators, in Ingold’s view, the understanding of literature is dictated solely

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

by personal pleasure or displeasure. This, in principle, implies “realistic” texts,
and the non-professional audience has succeded in imposing this kind of
“realism”—a concept of literature that remains fundamentally oriented
towards reality, has “everyday life” as its constant point of reference, and is
familiar, easily understandable, and “relatable.” For Ingold, this state of affairs
can easily be deduced from the Klagenfurt jury votes and prize speeches. This
peculiar, realistic writing style, and thus, the focus on non-literary interests,
has been permanently consolidated over the years and has now achieved clear
dominance. As a result, the quality parameters of juries have changed: good
is what goes down well, is easily understood, and can be conveniently shared
online. He calls the decline of the professional critic
“Instantcriticism”—perhaps a counterpart to “Instapoets”—a phenomenon
that induces, for him, a “McDonaldization” of the cultural scene.
Baßler thinks similarly when he observes the emergence of a so-called
“Midcult”—a genre based on realistic literature. These texts are not
challenging on a formal level and are not “trivial” popular literature. Readers
also bring into them the good feeling of “having heard the heart of culture
beating,” as Umberto Eco put it. Writers like Daniel Kehlmann, Bernhard
Schlink, Martin Suter, and Juli Zeh, as well as Elena Ferrante, Ian McEwan,
Karl Ove Knausgård, and Haruki Murakami are representatives of Midcult
(Baßler, “Konsens”). Takis Würger’s novel Stella, which deals with Germany’s
Nazi past, also triggered a controversy regarding its literary quality. As Baßler
reflected,
I can say that there have never been such divergent ideas about
what actually constitutes good literature as there are at the
moment. Spectacle or not, heavy characters, legibility, pop? We
simply no longer have a consensual standard of evaluation for
it, and this also shakes the gatekeeper function that publishers,
critics, and professors have had for so long. One can complain
about this from a cultural point of view, but it is possibly just the
logical effect of democratization, general education and access to
the leading medium Web 2.0. (Baßler, “Konsens”)
Baßler considers changes in taste a consequence of “access to the web,” which
is also the basis of social reading. Non-professional critics like Rupi Kaur’s four
million Instagram followers accuse professional critics of aloofness, elitism,
incompetence, and arrogance (Baßler, “Midcult”). Professional literary critics
have also changed their parameters because what is now expected from
literature is no longer aesthetic ambiguity but rather ethical and didactic
insights. Nevertheless Baßler doesn’t perceive these phenomena as a decline of
literature but as a challenge for the reading professionals in the book trade,
critics, and universities, who must instead become better at justifying their
aesthetic standards, adapting them to the current media and the social
conditions of reading.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

In fact, online reviewing is not solely the detriment to the literary system
that critics like Ingold seem to suggest. As an example, a few years ago online
reviews pushed the self-published Fifty Shades of Grey to planetary success.
This erotic novel was analyzed by the reputed sociologist Eva Illouz who tried
to understand its huge appeal. Despite the text’s formal limitations, Illouz
considered it representative of the aspirations and self-understanding of
contemporary women, further evidence that such tendencies as selfpublishing, lay criticism, new forms of literary evaluation and literary prestige
cannot be neglected nor can their impact on the “literary field” be ignored.
Because the millions of online reviews cannot be captured with the typical
tools of “close reading,” this paper proposes a proper methodological
framework to account for changes in current literary criticism. Given that
quantitative analysis is very uncommon among literary scholars (Salgaro,
“Digital Humanities”), the field could easily ignore the big data produced by
contemporary, real-world readers, but that would mean that literary theory had
neglected an obviously significant phenomenon.
On the methodological level, then, literary theory should be able to analyze
quantitative data and to integrate numbers into theoretical models. Secondly,
literary theory could contribute to our society of metrics by itself producing
quantitative data. This transformation of abstract concepts of theory into
numbers is called operationalization, and it has already been successfully
applied in literary theory (Moretti). Operationalization means, in the
vocabulary of the social sciences, the transformation of a concept into
empirically observable properties. In operationalization, data production and
analysis feed each other and form a circular process (Salgaro, “Digital
Humanities” 55). As a consequence of this method, not only can the feedback
of online reviewers be integrated into existing theories of literary evaluation,
but the evaluations of professional and non-professional readers can also be
compared by quantifying and contrasting their subjective comments. In so
doing, innovative forms of online reviewing will be better recognized and
anchored in the more traditional forms of literary criticism that appear in
journals, magazines, and newspapers. To understand the “quantitative
mentality” and the “rating culture” behind the big data of literature, literary
theory itself has to adopt data-driven methods.

3. #Instapoets and #Bookstagram
Niels Penke notes that Rupi Kaur’s milk and honey (2014), with three million
copies sold, is the most popular book of poetry in literary history (Penke
465–69). The collected poems in the volume were initially written on
Instagram where, beginning in 2013, Kaur developed a specific writing style,
using, for example, lowercase type or alternating texts and pictures. Penke
noted three themes in Kaur’s lyrics: self-referential poems in which the lyrical
“I” speaks about love, hope, and humiliation; a second, more referential type in
which a “you” is called upon to imagination and identification; and a third type

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

of brief, aphorism-like poems (468). Brevity is a main feature of literature born
on social media because it is mostly consumed on smartphones. Kaur’s four
million Instagram followers believe that her poetry is moving and emotionally
touching but also that it is profound and thought-provoking. Gerhard Lauer
acknowledged the huge success of Kaur’s work, particularly considering that
poetry is usually a niche editorial product (Lauer, “Gefühl”). The keys of
Kaur’s success are emotional authenticity about the experiences she shares
with her audience and an emphasis on the healing process of social
vulnerability—for example, the foregrounding in her texts of her experiences as
the target of racism.
Moritz Baßler observes that the reviews of milk and honey clash: while online
users adore it, professional critics have tended to ignore it or to consider it
“not real art” (Baßler, “Midcult”). Professional reviews are rejected by nonprofessional readers, if they are even acknowledged. Non-professional readers
accuse professional critics of detachment, elitism, and arrogance, charging
them with membership in a profession of general insignificance. The problem
of diverse evaluations of artistic value is also addressed by Anika Meyer, who
showed that such well-known artists as Cindy Sherman or Nan Goldin found
recognition of and a new audience for their artistic achievements on Instagram
(Groß). The quantification of artistic recognition on social media is
increasingly clear and implies a break: what experts think is good may not
interest a wider audience and vice versa.
For Baßler, “Social media and Web 2.0 interactive sites invalidate professional
gatekeepers not only on the side of the reception but also on the side of the
production” (Baßler, “Midcult”). In fact, poets like Rupi Kaur started careers
by bypassing the gatekeeping function of traditional publishing houses.
Means and methods of communication in publishing and bookselling have
been revolutionized over recent decades. The communication among authors,
writers, and readers was sporadic in the past. Publishing houses were the
gatekeepers of the literary system, and writers could reach an audience only
through them. Readers went to bookstores to buy books and were influenced
in their choices by intermediary agents such as advertisements, literary reviews
in journals, and bookstore staff. There was no direct communication among
publishers, writers, and (non-professional) readers; the only feedback writers
and publishers had were sales figures.
Nowadays important interactions among publishing houses, authors, and
readers take place in social media. Many writers interact with their readers
through their social-media accounts, and publishing houses all have accounts
of their own on Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook (Murray 105 ff.). Publishers
can read and collect reader feedback in Amazon reviews and on social-reading
platforms. They can assess readers’ “sentiment” and base commercial decisions
upon them. Such completely new phenomena as the BookTalk subcommunity
and hashtag on TikTok (more than ten billion views as of 31 May 2021) and
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

the widely used #Instabook hashtag on Instagram (nearly fourteen million
posts). These communication channels didn’t exist until a few years ago. For
the publishing industry “Direct-to-consumer” is the challenge of today
(Wischenbart et al.). Simone Murray has also recognized “disintermediation”
as the main characteristic of publishing in the digital sphere; it denotes the
capacity of authors to publish and sell their texts “without the gatekeeper
approval of mainstream media arbiters (agents, publishers, marketers,
publicists, and retailers)” (29). As a consequence, publishing houses
increasingly rely on the online reviews of non-professional readers for publicity
more than on the great magazine or newspaper literary critics (Chervel).
Smaller publishing houses use pitch parties on social media also to find new
authors. Following McGrath, “Pitch Parties attempt to circumvent the systems
of patronage on which the publishing industry relies” and provide an open
alternative to a closed industry.
Literary texts are also read today in many different formats and not only on
paper—as printed books, as ebooks, but also on smartphones or other readers.
Most tablets and e-readers allow fonts to be changed and resized, notes to
be recorded and retrieved, and passages to be highlighted. Other tools enable
readers to know the number of others who have highlighted the same passage.
According to Hayles, “In this sense, e-readers reinstitute communal reading”
(78) and, by entering into a collaboration with human readers, can sense and
respond to their demands.
Another crucial phenomenon of the last decade is self-publishing. According
to publishers’ statistics, the percentage of self-published titles rose to constitute
10% of the German book market (Wischenbart et al.). But the phenomenon
of self-publishing is important not only because it is unprecedented but also
because it shows that the gatekeeper function of publishing houses is changing.
Moreover, it demonstrates the increasing importance of social reading in
pushing a literary text to success. E. L. James’ Fifty Shades of Grey is only one
of many possible examples.
The phenomenon of social reading and online reviewing challenges traditional
notions of both reviewing and literary communication. Instapoets not only
produce highly popular literature, because they deal with social issues in the
public domain, but they employ a literary style that is easily understood; more
importantly, their work can be quickly shared (Penke 461–62). Their
nicknames, their graphic styles, and their themes are accurately selected to
contribute to their success. They publish poems on Instagram at certain times
of the day, using specific hashtags—#Instapoetry, #Poetrycommunity, and
#Poetsofinstagram—to reach a specific target. These sharing practices, which
are typical of social media, are common for digital poetry and feed a sense
of collaboration (Kovalik and Curwood). The poetic style of #Instapoets
encourages online sharing and dissemination. These authors could be
considered innovators of multimodal writing because they employ ever-

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

evolving technologies to engage in authentic literacy practices in digital spaces.
For example, the visibility of (paper) books and reading is enhanced: hashtags
like #Instapoets often accompany pictures of hands holding books or leafing
through a book. For #Bookstagram followers, the reading act is exposed, and
the materiality of a paper book becomes crucial to its visualization. The book,
with its symbolic capital, becomes an axis of attraction for empathy,
compassion, and emotional engagement that can be shared with peers.
Followers, likes, shares, and comments, all of which can be expressed
numerically, represent the degree of social prestige of each #Instapoet. For these
writers, authority is conferred by likes. The value of “likes,” however, concerns
not solely the social standing of a writer but above all income. Paradoxically,
by increasing the number of followers, #Instapoets can stimulate the interest of
traditional “actors” in the literary field (i.e. literary agents) (Sovich). The logic
of likes is a competitive one: “the more, the better” (Passmann 15). To reference
Bourdieu, symbolic and economic capital go hand in hand in such cases. For
Simone Murray, Bourdieu’s conceptual models require sensitive reframing if
they are to engage with the current digital literary sphere. In the pre-internet
era, agents in the literary field held a monopoly on the award of the symbolic
capital expressed by literary prizes, critical endorsement, and access to
publication (Murray 18). Nowadays, the literary sphere is no longer
characterized by cultural kingmakers but by mass democratic digital
accessibility. The selection of cultural goods is no longer filtered by human
gatekeepers but by algorithms. Amazon and Google use automated selection
filters between authors and readers. These algorithms tend to be “black boxes”
which, in Murray’s view, “thus render … the cultural encoded social and
cultural priorities harder to identify and interrogate” (57). While, for
Bourdieu, a small number of individuals in the literary field masked their
individual investments behind institutional values, “once cultural gatekeeping
shifts to computer programs, sociological critiques of individual or smallgroup agency become far harder to sustain” (57). Algorithms also permit
readers to “review the reviewer,” and reviews with the highest readers
preferences are sorted higher in the listings (135). If, in the past, agents in
the literary sphere were individuals with specific interests and powers, the
discussion of and feedback on literary texts are now dominated by anonymous
forces driven by multiple and highly complex quantitative elements. The fact
is that the millions of reviewers on social media are, for these algorithms,
more determinative than is the unique voice of the reviewer in the cultural
page of a newspaper or magazine. The feedback Instapoets receive therefore
appears online, in social networks, and not in specialized academic journals or
in printed newspapers.
Another difference with reference to pre-internet writers is the communication
between authors and their audiences. This type of reality, based on the sharing
of photographs, texts, and intimate and personal thoughts capable of reaching
thousands of people simultaneously was, for Rupi Kaur, “the only way to go”
Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

(Sovich). In other words, it was the only environment in which she could share
poems filled with personal themes as a sort of “public diary.” Kaur alternates
selfies and poems in her posts to amplify her proximity to her followers and
amplify the authenticity effect of her texts.
#Instapoet fans comment on photos of their favorite artists, send direct
messages, and, in turn, share the poems closest to their preferences. In the
process, distinctions between the private and the public sphere are usually
abolished, and people with the same interests can communicate directly. For
users, the anonymity presumably granted to readers and followers by internet
platforms is associated with a sense of liberation that encourages free expression
of thoughts and feelings. In contrast, in pre-internet communication the link
between writer and reader was a one-way communication, and readers were not
considered the peers of authors.
A phenomenon like #Instapoets is highly interesting for our discussion because
it produces millions of online literary reviews that contribute significantly to
the big data of contemporary literature and because authors themselves are the
theorists of a new binary (professional/non-professional) literary-evaluation
system, which has become typical of the twenty-first-century “literary system.”
Thanks to #Instapoets, poetry can become a “consumer good” for all,
produced outside of literary circles through self-publishing. As Rupi Kaur has
stated:
there was no market for poetry about trauma abuse loss love and
healing through the lens of a punjabi-sikh immigrant woman.
so i decided to self publish. even though everyone said not to
cause doing so would lock me out of prestigious literary circles.
(Qureshi)
With her lowercase texts, Kaur seems to fight against elites in the literary field
and to make her opposition apparent through the use of strategies and
channels different from those of pre-internet writers. Kaur deliberately rejects
the expertise of the gatekeepers of “prestigious literary circles.” This rejection
of expertise is typical for current digitized societies (Nichols). She aims at a
peer-to-peer relationship with readers and fans and does not need professional
critical authority to assign “social prestige” to her writings. She also renounces
the claim of elitism that the avant-garde concept of literariness implies. In a
recent post on her Instagram account she narrates her struggles with canonical
gatekeepers:
7 years ago today i self-published ‘milk and honey’ while starting
my last year in university. prior to this i was trying to get my
poems published in anthologies, literary magazines, and journals,
but they weren’t being accepted so i stopped trying, […] i then

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

self-published with the support of my friends At that point ‘milk
and honey’ got picked up by a publisher. spent over 100 weeks
on the new York times bestsellers list. (Dsouza)
These authors’ literary practices are not far from the commercial. Other
#Instapoets print their verses on T-shirts, hats, posters, charms, and notebooks,
transforming the poet into a brand that can be monetized (Lederman).
Empirical studies on book purchases have similarly shown that, in today’s
publishing climate, the author functions as a brand name and must establish
“brand loyalty” with readers (Kamphuis). The rejection of the expertise of
the traditional gatekeepers of “the literary system” denotes, in Bourdieu’s
vocabulary, a rejection of the symbolic capital of the literary field. The number
of followers of the Instapoets correlates with popularity and presumably with
“economic capital.” These writers seem to give up the laurels of the poet’s
symbolic capital deliberately in favor of commercial success and popularity.
Their followers’ likes seem preferable to reviews in important newspapers.
The power of the non-professional reviewer compared to professional reviewer
seems a present-day phenomenon.
The traditional idea of the isolated poet, who stands in opposition to the social
system, has been outclassed by the possibilities offered by social networks. Now
the authors are engaged in one-to-many relationships with readers, intervening
in cultural debates and selectively updating their fans on the progress of their
writing projects. “Interactivity” is one of the main features of literary
communication in the digital sphere where authors have the possibility to
interact with their readers through websites, blogs, vlogs, Twitter and Facebook
accounts and maintain intimate connection with them (Murray 29).
New generations see #Instapoets as points of reference and choose Instagram
as the only possibility to express themselves freely. Their engagement on social
media is crucial. Thanks to social media, they create fan-communities that
undermine such traditional institutions of the literary field as editors, literary
agents, publishers, and reviewers. #Instapoets don’t aim to be received by
professional readers: their readers are lay people, and they feel equal to them.
This innovative and successful form of literary communication remains to be
conceptualized by literary theory.

4. Methodological questions in the analysis of reviewing in the
digital age
What can literary theory do in this neoteric context? Recent studies mainly
evoke institutions under threat and assume the vantage point of such
traditional gatekeepers as professional literary critics (S. Löffler). Some literary
critics may prefer to retire to their ivory towers which, from the perspective of
social media, is a stance that seems more and more obsolete. For Philip Ingold,
literature that claims to be art—not on best or bestseller lists—can survive

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

“only in the ivory tower … finally becoming elitist and self-worthy again”.
Ingold believes that popular fiction certified by ratings may be and remain what
it has become—a part of entertainment literature and infotainment.
Ingold’s critical position implies both ignoring the production of literature
on social media that has created such important phenomena as #Instapoets
and #Twitterature and overlooking the millions of young readers who are
a potential audience for high-brow (canonical) literature. Thomas Anz
consequently recognized the positive evolution of online criticism and its
ability to bring many new critics and new target groups to literary criticism.
First of all, it is important to understand that common ground exists between
the lay reviewer and the professional: the reviewing activity itself, which implies
the evaluation of the literary value of a text. Well before the institution of
social reading and online book retailers, two German scholars, Renate von
Heydebrand and Simone Winko, were studying the evaluation of literature.
They developed a model that took into account both the social and the
individual aspects of reviewing by abandoning the notion of literary quality as
an intrinsic characteristic of the text. Following their thinking, a literary text is
not intrinsically valuable; rather, it only acquires an attributive value in relation
to specific standards. In appealing to the standards of cultivated readers, a
“good” book should be “complex” or “rhetorically elaborated” to meet their
expectations (values), while a “good” book can be a “suspenseful” love story
or detective novel for less sophisticated readers. Interestingly, cultivated readers
seem to share the criteria of literary value with modernist writers.
As Heydebrand and Winko have pointed out, “Literary evaluation is by no
means limited by professional judgment on literary texts” (225). That is,
different forms of professional reviewing—by journalists, literary critics, or
literary scholars—also exist (Rippl and Winko). The actors in the “literary
system” can express evaluations in a variety of ways, including through explicit
verbal utterances and through non-linguistic acts of selection (e.g., buying
one book instead of another). The indirect expression of preferences is
multifaceted; it might occur in an author’s choice of literary allusions, a reader’s
choice of one novel over another, an anthologist’s inclusion or exclusion of
a writer, a critic’s comparison of several contemporary books, a professor’s
selection of works for a course syllabus, a student’s choice of courses, or a
journalist’s survey of an author. Non-linguistic acts expressing intrinsic literary
value can also be expressed through numbers (a book’s sales figures, for
example).
The evaluative process might be elicited by aesthetic, educational, or economic
factors because the assessment of literary quality is regulated by norms that are
influenced by both the economic and the cultural spheres. While the former
aims at maximizing profits according to the law of supply and demand, the
latter regulates “the possible gains in terms of knowledge, action orientation,
gratification, prestige” (Heydebrand and Winko 230). Standards of value are
Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

governed by four dimensions: formal values, content values, relational values,
and reception values. While the first three take place on a social level and refer
to the text, the fourth takes place on an individual level.
The sub-dimension of individual value encompasses the quality of literary
texts with regard to personal needs, and it includes the following psychological
assets:
• Cognitive value (reflection, memorability)
• Practical value (making sense, significance)
• Hedonistic value (pleasure, entertainment)
Importantly, these values are valid for both professional and non-professional
readers. What changes are the standards of values they use, which are often
a consequence of their differing expertise. Individual values are not the only
crucial aspect of the evaluation of books. Social value considers literary texts in
terms of:
• Economic value (literary works as objects of the economic system)
• Social prestige (symbolic capital within particular texts)
The Heydebrand/Winko models encompass professional and nonprofessional readers as well as linguistic and non-linguistic acts of evaluation
and can also capture all the new tendencies of online reviewing (Rippl and
Winko 147–48). This is precisely the praxis that has grown exponentially in
recent years and created a challenge for current criticism. The Heydebrand/
Winko model has already been operationalized in the form of a questionnaire
developed with Arthur Jacobs and Jana Lüdtke, two neuropsychologists at
the Free University of Berlin. The questionnaire has been tested with fleshand-blood readers and validated in other studies showing that it is a valid
instrument to assess the literary value and social prestige of literary texts
attributed by concrete readers (Salgaro et al.). It is potentially a tool that can
shed light on the multifaceted reality, values and expectations of contemporary
reviewers.
This is not the only operationalization in the field: online reviewing has also
become a smaller branch within the bigger research field of digital social
reading. Because many projects and research groups are focused on these
phenomena, an accurate “snap-shot” of this young and vital field is difficult.
Current research has taken different approaches to the big data of modern
literary reviewing as it is practiced by professional and non-professional
reviewers, and they can be summarized as follows:
1. Analysis of literary reviews based on quantitative evaluations, such as
the stars on Amazon or Goodreads;

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

2. Investigation of qualitative (non-numerical) literary reviews on
websites and social media; and
3. Analysis and comparison of professional and non-professional
(online) criticism.
Valid applications already exist for each of these research paths. Quantitative
evaluations of literary reviews can compare numerical data, expressed with
stars, on Amazon or in print publications. These numbers can be correlated
with other numbers—for example, sales figures—which are often published
in newspapers or on websites. A good example of this research line is a study
in which Goodreads book metrics were compared to a range of book-based
impact indicators for 15,928 academic books across broad fields (Kousha et al.).
Other research has shown how much user behavior on Goodreads is indicative
of sales on retail book platforms such as Amazon (Maity et al.).
Investigation of qualitative literary reviews on websites and social media brings
the concept of operationalization into play, which is already common in the
Digital Humanities. Operationalization can be implemented, for example, by
observing the occurrence of certain adjectives in online reviews. Using the
LIWC (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count) software, a 2019 study
linguistically analyzed 474,803 unique reviews posted on Goodreads between
2014 and 2016 (Hajibayova). The high rate of function words coupled with
positive emotion words suggests that reviewers tend to convey their opinions in
order to influence other individuals’ reading choices. These observations were
supported by reviews of graphic novels (Hajibayova and McCorkhill). Other
studies have confirmed the emotionality of reviews by highlighting the fact
that 70% of emotion words appear in the first sentence of a book review and
noting that reviewers mostly discuss the book’s content rather than its formal
characteristics (Wang et al.).
In another study, the book reviews of twenty-five 2009 bestsellers listed on
Amazon were analyzed to understand which factors induced people to buy
a book. Schreier coded Amazon reviews to understand reviewers’ reasons for
liking or recommending a book and showed that the main reason given was
“involvement,” which had the highest frequency in the sample. A closer
inspection showed that readers’ involvement concerned, in hierarchical order,
plot and characters. Aesthetic involvement" which, for literary scholars is the
main factor in appreciating a text, ranked only seventh on this list (312). For
authors, these results raise concerns about the evaluation parameters, prestige,
and value of reviews on such platforms as Amazon, Goodreads, and others.
Other studies have investigated various aspects of Goodreads reviews, such
as their characteristics compared to Amazon reviews (Dimitrov et al.) and
gender differences across reviewers and authors (Thelwall). Similar studies have
been carried out for platforms such as Wattpad.com (Pianzola et al.) or
LovelyBooks.de, the largest German-language book community (340,000
Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

members and 1.2 million reviews). These studies show, among others, that a
novel that becomes a show will receive about four times as many ratings on
Goodreads.com as a novel that has never been adapted to TV or film (Manshel
et al.).
Most of these studies have focused on social-reading reviews alone (Rebora
et al.), sometimes giving the impression that book reviewing was born with
the internet. But rating culture actually has a history. Only a few studies have
tried to bridge the gap between professional and non-professional criticism,
a comparison that could shed light on current evaluation practices in literary
reading by showing continuities and ruptures between traditional and online
criticism. Below I would like to list some examples.
Harada and Yamashita showed that reviews in print newspapers focus on
“writing style,” while online reviews emphasize “plot,” and “setting.” In
addition, online reviews included more subjective and negative evaluations.
Another succinct example of comparisons of online, non-professional
reviewing with professional criticism was proposed by Stefan Neuhaus. After
reconstructing the birth of literary reviews, Neuhaus analyzed lay reviews on
Amazon. Because they appeared on a commercial website, these comments
became part of advertising and public relations. He analyzed two online
reviews, one of Franz Kafka’s Process and one of John Grisham’s Sycamore
Row, to show their emphatic tone, the low quality of writing, and the lack
of argumentation. The most amusing one included this line: “I would love to
build a time machine, go back in time, and murder Franz Kafka before he ever
had the opportunity to write a book.”
Another approach was proposed by Peter Boot, who studied Dutch blogs to
understand which persons or institutions were considered authoritative by
online reviewers. Frequently mentioned authorities were authors, companies
and institutions, online critics, and prizes, a noteworthy result because it
suggests that the influence of critics is still powerful.
A different project, “Evaluation of Literature by Professional and Layperson
Critics,” led by Gunther Martens at the University of Gent, is studying the
differences between professional critics and lay readers by contrasting their
criteria for distinguishing “good” from “bad.” To do this, the project is using
corpus and sentiment analyses to explore the visibility and popularity of
literary awards such as the Ingeborg Bachmann prize on social media.
In line with the above-mentioned approaches, a study by Salgaro and Rebora
used the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) software to compare
book reviews published on social networks with those that appear in paper
magazines and literary journals. As a means to bridge the gap between
professional and non-professional criticism, they focused explicitly on the
precise vocabulary used in online and print reviews to express “critical distance”
in literary reading. As expected, the analysis showed that “affect words”

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

dominated on social networks in comparison to print magazines (44% more)
and literary journals (95% more). This emotional or “affective” approach did
not impede “cognitive processes,” showing that no interference exists between
cognitive and emotive/biological/perceptual processes in book reviewing.
Together with the Heydebrand/Winko model mentioned earlier, these studies
are potentially part of a renewed methodological framework of literary theory
intended to shed light on the multifaceted reality of contemporary reviewing.
Because the results of these studies are expressed in numbers, they can
contribute to the big data of literary reviewing which, in turn, may allow
comparability. By using data-driven approaches, we may help #Instapoetry find
its way to a new, more productive form of #Instacriticism.
Peer-Reviewed by James English
Submitted: November 11, 2021 EDT, Accepted: June 12, 2022 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

works cited
Anz, Thomas. “Kontinuitäten und Veränderungen der Literaturkritik in Zeiten des Internets: Fünf
Thesen und einige Bedenken.” Digitale Literaturvermittlung: Praxis, Forschung, Archivierung,
edited by Renate Giacomuzzi et al., StudienVerlag, 2010, pp. 48–63.
Baßler, Moritz. “Der Konsens ist Weg. In Leipzig treffen Leserschaft, KritikerInnen, Verlage und
Buchhandel aufeinander. Zuletzt haben sie sich allerlei Kränkungen zugefügt.” Tageszeitung, 16
Mar. 2019, https://taz.de/Buchmesse-in-Leipzig/!5577851/.
---. “Der Neue Midcult.” POP-ZEITSCHRIFT, 28 June 2021, https://pop-zeitschrift.de/2021/06/2
8/der-neue-midcultautorvon-moritz-bassler-autordatum28-6-2021-datum/.
Bloom, Harald. The Western Canon: The Books and School of the Ages. 1st ed., Harcourt Brace, 1994.
Boot, Peter. “The Desirability of a Corpus of Online Book Responses.” Second Workshop on
Computational Linguistics for Literature, 2013.
Bourdieu, Pierre. “Television.” European Review, vol. 9, no. 3, July 2001, pp. 245–56, https://doi.org/
10.1017/s1062798701000230.
---. The Field of Cultural Production: Essays on Art and Literature. Columbia University Press, 1993.
Chervel, Thierry. “Die Kritik und ihre Päpste: Rückblick auf ein Genre.” Rezensiv - OnlineRezensionen und Kulturelle Bildung, edited by Guido Graf et al., transcript Verlag, 2021, https://do
i.org/10.1515/9783839454435-019.
Dijck, José van. “Users like You? Theorizing Agency in User-Generated Content.” Media, Culture &
Society, vol. 31, no. 1, Jan. 2009, pp. 41–58, https://doi.org/10.1177/0163443708098245.
Dimitrov, Stefan, et al. “Goodreads Versus Amazon: The Effect of Decoupling Book Reviewing And
Book Selling.” Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media 9, no. 1,
2015.
Dsouza, Jenny. “Excerpts from 'Milk and Honey' by Rupi Kaur.” LIFEism, 1 Nov. 2021, https://lifeis
m.co/excerpts-from-milk-and-honey-by-rupi-kaur/.
Franzen, Johannes. “Everyone’s a Critic: Rezensieren in Zeiten des ästhetischen Plebiszit.” Unterstellte
Leseschaften: Tagung, Kulturwissenschaftliches Institut Essen, 29. bis 30. September 2020,
DuEPublico, 2021, https://doi.org/10.37189/duepublico/74186.
Groß, Joshua, editor. “Mindstate Malibu: Kritik ist auch nur eine Form von Eskapismus.” Starfruit
publications, 2018.
Hajibayova, Lala. “Investigation of Goodreads’ Reviews: Kakutanied, Deceived or Simply Honest?”
Journal of Documentation, vol. 75, no. 3, May 2019, pp. 612–26, https://doi.org/10.1108/jd-07-20
18-0104.
Hajibayova, Lala, and Mallory McCorkhill. “Graphic Novels through the Lens of Goodreads
Reviews: Artistic, Textual, or Blend of Both?” Journal of Librarianship and Information Science,
July 2021, https://doi.org/10.1177/09610006211033898.
Harada, Takashi, and Sawako Yamashita. “The Analysis of Differences between Online Book Reviews
and Those in Newspapers.” Joho Chishiki Gakkaishi, vol. 20, no. 2, 2010, pp. 65–72, https://doi.or
g/10.2964/jsik.20_65.
Hayles, N. Katherine. Postprint: Books and Becoming Computational. Columbia University Press,
2020, https://doi.org/10.7312/hayl19824.
Heydebrand, Renate von, and Simone Winko. “13. The Qualities of Literatures: A Concept of
Literary Evaluation in Pluralistic Societies.” The Quality of Literature: Linguistic Studies in Literary
Evaluation, edited by Willie van Peer, vol. 4, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2008, pp.
223–39, https://doi.org/10.1075/lal.4.16hey.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

Illouz, Eva. Hard-Core Romance: Fifty Shades of Grey, Best-Sellers, and Society. University of Chicago
Press, 2014, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226153551.001.0001.
Ingold, Philipp. Laienherrschaft – in Klagenfurt und anderswo. 2014, https://www.lyriktext.de/ingol
d-essays/laienherrschaft-n-in-klagenfurt-und-anderswo.
Janssen, Susanne. “The Empirical Study of Careers in Literature and the Arts.” The Psychology and
Sociology of Literature: In Honor of Elrud Ibsch, edited by Elrud Ibsch et al., John Benjamins
Publishing Company, 2001, pp. 323–57, https://doi.org/10.1075/upal.35.19jan.
Kamphuis, Jan. “Satisfaction with Books: Some Empirical Findings.” Poetics, vol. 20, no. 5–6, Dec.
1991, pp. 471–85, https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-422x(91)90021-g.
Kousha, Kayvan, et al. “Goodreads Reviews to Assess the Wider Impacts of Books.” Journal of the
Association for Information Science and Technology, vol. 68, no. 8, June 2017, pp. 2004–16, http
s://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23805.
Kovalik, Kate, and Jen Scott Curwood. “#poetryisnotdead: Understanding Instagram Poetry within a
Transliteracies Framework.” Literacy, vol. 53, no. 4, Mar. 2019, pp. 185–95, https://doi.org/10.111
1/lit.12186.
Kreuzmair, Elias, and Eckhard Schumacher, editors. Literatur nach der Digitalisierung: Zeitkonzepte
und Gegenwartsdiagnosen. De Gruyter, 2021, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758603:
Lauer, Gerhard. “Gefühl ist alles – Lyrik im Internet.” Neue Zürcher Zeitung, 1 June 2018, https://w
ww.nzz.ch/feuilleton/gefuehl-ist-alles-lyrik-im-internet-ld.1369814.
---. Lesen im digitalen Zeitalter, Geisteswissenschaften im digitalen Zeitalter, Band 1. Wbg Academic,
2020.
Lederman, Marsha. “Meet Atticus, the Most Famous Canadian Poet You've Never Heard of.” The
Globe and Mail, 19 July 2017, https://www.theglobeandmail.com/arts/books-and-media/meet-atti
cus-the-most-famous-canadian-poet-youve-never-heard-of/article35730003/.
Löffler, Philipp, editor. Reading the Canon: Literary History in the 21st Century. Universitätsverlag
Winter, 2017.
Löffler, Sigrid. “Machen Blogger die Literaturkritik kaputt?” Deutschlandfunk Kultur, 2020, http
s://www.deutschlandfunkkultur.de/sigrid-loeffler-ueber-amateure-vs-profis-machen-blogger-die-10
0.html.
Mahdawi, Arwa. “Are You Ready for a Future Where We're All Reviewed like Uber Drivers?” The
Guardian, 15 Mar. 2016, https://www.theguardian.com/technology/commentisfree/2016/mar/1
5/rating-culture-score-personal-privacy-uber-sharing-economy.
Maity, Suman Kalyan, et al. “Understanding Book Popularity on Goodreads.” Proceedings of the 2018
ACM Conference on Supporting Groupwork - GROUP ’18, ACM, 2018, pp. 117–21, https://doi.or
g/10.1145/3148330.3154512.
Manshel, Alexander, et al. “The Rise of Must-Read TV.” The Atlantic, 16 July 2021, https://www.the
atlantic.com/culture/archive/2021/07/tv-adaptations-fiction/619442/.
Martens, Gunther, et al. “Literary Criticism 2.0: A Digital Analysis of the Professional and
Community-Driven Evaluative Talk of Literature Surrounding the Ingeborg Bachmann Prize.”
DH Benelux 2021, 2021, https://2021.dhbenelux.org/home/abstracts/.
Martens, Gunther, and Lore de Greve. “#Bookstagram and beyond: The Presence and Depiction of
the Bachmann Literary Prize on Social Media (2007-2017).” DH Benelux Journal, vol. 3, 2021, pp.
1–22.
Mau, Steffen. The Metric Society: On the Quantification of the Social. Polity Press, 2019.
McGrath, Laura B. “America's Next Top Novel.” Post45, 8 Apr. 2020, https://post45.org/2020/04/a
mericas-next-top-novel/.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

Moretti, Franco. “Operationalizing.” New Left Review, no. 84, Dec. 2013, pp. 103–19.
Murray, Simone. The Digital Literary Sphere: Reading, Writing, and Selling Books in the Internet Era.
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2018.
Nassehi, Armin. Muster: Theorie der digitalen Gesellschaft. C.H. Beck, 2019, https://doi.org/10.1710
4/9783406740251.
Neuhaus, Stefan. “Vom Anfang und Ende der Literaturkritik. Das literarische Feld zwischen
Autonomie und Kommerz.” Die Rezension: Aktuelle Tendenzen der Literaturkritik, edited by
Andrea Bartl et al., Königshausen & Neumann, 2017.
Nichols, Thomas M. The Death of Expertise: The Campaign against Established Knowledge and Why
It Matters. Oxford University Press, 2017.
Passmann, Johannes. Die Soziale Logik des Likes: Eine Twitter-Ethnografie. Campus Verlag, 2018.
Penke, Niels. “#instapoetry. Populäre Lyrik auf Instagram und ihre Affordanzen.” Zeitschrift für
Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik, vol. 49, no. 3, July 2019, pp. 451–75, https://doi.org/10.100
7/s41244-019-00143-1.
Peresson, Giovanni. “Rapporto sullo Stato dell'Editoria in Italia.” Associazione italiana editori, 2021,
https://www.torrossa.com/it/resources/an/2248333.
Pianzola, Federico, et al. “Wattpad as a Resource for Literary Studies in the 21st Century. Quantitative
and Qualitative Examples of the Importance of Digital Social Reading and Readers’ Comments in
the Margins.” PLOS ONE, vol. 15, no. 1, Jan. 2020, p. e0226708, https://doi.org/10.1371/journa
l.pone.0226708.
Qureshi, Huma. “How Do I Love Thee? Let Me Instagram It.” The Guardian, 23 Nov. 2015, http
s://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/23/instapoets-instagram-twitter-poetry-lang-leav-rup
i-kaur-tyler-knott-gregson.
Rebora, Simone, et al. “Digital Humanities and Digital Social Reading.” Digital Scholarship in the
Humanities, vol. 36, no. Supplement_2, Oct. 2021, pp. 230–50, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqab0
20.
Reckwitz, Andreas. “Die Gesellschaft der Singularitäten: Zum Strukturwandel der Moderne.” Kultur
- Interdisziplinäre Zugänge, 2018, pp. 45–62, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-21050-2_2.
Rees, C. J. van. “How a Literacy Work Becomes a Masterpiece: On the Threefold Selection Practised
by Literary Criticism.” Poetics, vol. 12, no. 4–5, Nov. 1983, pp. 397–417, https://doi.org/10.1016/
0304-422x(83)90015-3.
Rippl, Gabriele, and Simone Winko, editors. Handbuch Kanon und Wertung. J.B. Metzler, 2013, http
s://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-476-05306-0.
Royal society for public health. #StatusofMind. 2017, https://www.rsph.org.uk/our-work/campaign
s/status-of-mind.html.
Salgaro, Massimo. “Historical Introduction to the Special Issue on Literariness.” Scientific Study of
Literature, vol. 8, no. 1, Dec. 2018, pp. 6–18, https://doi.org/10.1075/ssol.00005.sal.
---. “How soon is now? : Zeitmaschinen und Zeitreisen in den ,,Tiny Tales“ von Florian Meimberg.”
Zeitschrift Für Germanistik, vol. 32, no. 2, Jan. 2022, pp. 395–412, https://doi.org/10.3726/9217
1_395.
---. “The Digital Humanities as a Toolkit for Literary Theory: Three Case Studies of the
Operationalization of the Concepts of ‘Late Style,’ ‘Authorship Attribution,’ and ‘Literary
Movement.’” Iperstoria, vol. 12, 2018, pp. 50–60.
Salgaro, Massimo, et al. “Does Age Determine Whether We Read E-Books?” The Materiality of
Reading, edited by Theresa S. Schilhab and Sue Walker, 1st ed., Aarhus University Press, 2020, pp.
46–67.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Literary value in the era of big data. Operationalizing critical distance in professional and non-professional reviews

---. “How to Measure the Social Prestige of a Nobel Prize in Literature? Development of a Scale
Assessing the Literary Value of a Text.” TXT, vol. 1, 2018, pp. 138–48.
Salgaro, Massimo, and Simone Rebora. “Measuring the ‘Critical Distance’. A Corpus -Based Analysis
of Italian Book Reviews.” AIUCD2018 - Book of Abstracts, edited by Daria Spampinato, 2018, pp.
161–63, https://doi.org/10.6092/UNIBO/AMSACTA/5997.
Schreier, Margrit. “‘Is It Possible to Give a 6 out of 5 Stars?’: Book Selection and Recommendation in
the Internet Age.” Primerjalna Književnost, vol. 33, 2010, pp. 307–20.
Sovich, Nina. “My Love Is Like a Hashtag; Instagram Gives Rise to New Poets.” Wall Street Journal,
9 Sept. 2017, https://www.wsj.com/articles/my-love-is-like-a-hashtag-instagram-gives-rise-to-new-p
oets-1504954801.
Stalder, Felix. Kultur der Digitalität. 1st ed., Suhrkamp, 2016.
Thelwall, Mike. “Book Genre and Author Gender: Romance>Paranormal-Romance to
Autobiography>Memoir.” Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology, vol.
68, no. 5, Dec. 2016, pp. 1212–23, https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.23768.
van der Weel, Adriaan. Changing Our Textual Minds: Towards a Digital Order of Knowledge.
Manchester Univ. Press, 2011.
Wang, Kai, et al. “Exploring Goodreads Reviews for Book Impact Assessment.” Journal of
Informetrics, vol. 13, no. 3, Aug. 2019, pp. 874–86, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2019.07.003.
Wischenbart, Rüdiger, et al. Diversity Report 2020. Trends in Literary Translation in Europe. 2020.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

