Seminck, Olga, et al. “The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and
Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol.
7, no. 3, Sept. 2022, doi:10.22148/001c.37588.

ARTICLE

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and
Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature
Olga Seminck 1

, Philippe Gambette 2

, Dominique Legallois 1 , Thierry Poibeau 1

1 Laboratoire Langues, Textes, Traitements informatiques, Cognition UMR 8094, 2 Laboratoire d'Informatique Gaspard-Monge UMR 8049

Keywords: idiolect, French literature, authorship, stylometry, literature
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.37588

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 7, Issue 3, 2022

The way in which authors express themselves is unique but changes over their
lifetime. However, quantitative studies of this idiolectal evolution are rare. Using
the Corpus for Idiolectal Research (CIDRE) that contains the dated works of 11
prolific 19th century French fiction writers, we propose new methods to identify,
quantify and describe the grammatical-stylistic changes that take place using
lexico-morphosyntactic patterns, also called motifs. To examine the strength of
the chronological signal of change, we developed a method to calculate if a
distance matrix of literary works contains a stronger chronological signal than
expected by chance. Ten out of 11 corpora showed a higher than chance
chronological signal, leading us to conclude that the evolution of the idiolect is in
a mathematical sense monotonic, supporting the rectilinearity hypothesis
previously put forward in the stylometric literature. The rectilinear property of
the evolution of the idiolect found for most authors in CIDRE subsequently
enabled us to propose a machine learning task: predicting the year in which a
work was written. For the majority of the authors in our corpus, the accuracy and
the amount of variance that is explained by the model were high and we discuss
why the technique might fail for others. After applying a feature selection
algorithm, we examined the most important features, i.e. the motifs that have the
greatest influence on idiolectal evolution. We find that some of those features are
stylistic and have been previously identified in qualitative literature studies. We
report some remarkable stylistic constructions revealed by our algorithm to
illustrate which kind of stylistic patterns can be extracted using our method.

1. Introduction
Is it true that we do not speak at 20 as we do at 60? In this article we examine
if an individual’s representation of a language — the idiolect — and the
utterances that are its product, are fixed once and for all or not. Little research
has been carried out to characterize and measure the evolution of the idiolect
in an extensive manner. Our main goal was thus to develop methods in this
direction that can also be applied to other longitudinal corpora. We evaluated
our methods on a corpus containing the idiolects of 11 French fiction writers.
There are several reasons why it is interesting to take into account interpersonal
variation over time. First, the notion of idiolect is relevant for corpus
linguistics. As Heck stressed, idiolects are the primary objects of study in
linguistics (in the end, we can only observe utterances that are the products of
idiolects). However, most often corpora are considered as homogenous, and do
not take into account the influence of individual authors on their content. It is
somehow assumed that the large number of different authors in a resource will
erase any individual differences. But taking these differences into account could

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

help better understand to what extent some features are specific to a genre,
a community or, on the contrary, to an individual author or speaker. In this
article, we focus on the chronological evolution of the idiolect.
Let us start by introducing some important terminology. The first term that
needs to be clarified is idiolect. In Bloch's original definition, the idiolect
represents: “The totality of the possible utterances of one speaker at one time
in using a language to interact with one other speaker.” More recently, Dittmar
(111) proposed this definition: an idiolect is “the language of the individual,
which because of the acquired habits and the stylistic features of the
personality differs from that of other individuals and in different life phases
shows, as a rule, different or differently weighted CM [communicative
means]”.
In addition to this, we believe that the definition of idiolect should take into
account the fact that every utterance (written or oral) of an individual is part
of a particular discursive practice — or, put differently, of a particular textual
genre (informal conversation, tweet, philosophical essay, etc.). The idiolect
should thus necessarily be considered in relation to a particular practice: it
corresponds to the use by an individual of only part of the possible linguistic
forms related to a discursive practice. Bloch takes this into account when he
states “that a given speaker may have different idiolects at successive stages of
his career, and […] that he may have two or more different idiolects at the same
time.”
Another relevant notion is style. Style corresponds to linguistic forms that an
observer considers as remarkable from an aesthetic point of view, in a particular
discourse, compared to the discourse of others. Although the definitions of
idiolect and style are intertwined, especially for those working with literary
corpora, the main difference is that, for stylistic studies, a judgement has
generally to be performed on the stylistic value of the linguistic phenomena
under study. It should be noted that the notion of stylistic judgement is in
itself highly subjective, and no clear criteria seem to be available to determine
what has a stylistic value and what does not. Consequently, we focused on the
evolution of idiolects, instead of styles, so as to avoid aesthetic judgements. We
therefore use Bloch's definition of the idiolect that includes “the totality of
possible utterances”, instead of Dittmar's that focuses on stylistic features.
In this article, after the presentation of related work, we present two
computational experiments to study the chronological evolution of the
idiolect, followed by a qualitative analysis. We start by examining the
rectilinearity hypothesis mentioned in the work of Stamou, i.e. “the hypothesis
that certain aspects of an author’s writing style evolve rectilinearly over the course
of an author’s lifetime, hence with appropriate methods and stylistic markers,
such changes ought to be detectable”. First, we evaluate the chronological signal
in corpora including the dated works of French 19th century authors by socalled Robinsonian matrices. Second, we build linear regression models for
Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

each author studied to see whether it is possible to predict the year in which
a particular novel was written by extrapolation from other works by the same
author. Our regression models rely on special linguistic-stylistic patterns, called
motifs (Legallois et al.) and are able to identify the patterns that play the
greatest role in the chronological evolution of the idiolect. We discuss the
stylistic value of some of these motifs in a qualitative analysis presented in
section 6. The article ends with a discussion and conclusion.

2. Literature Review
Our work is directly in line with the notion of stylochronometry, a special
research “niche” that studies the diachronic evolution of style. The term was
coined by Forsyth and encompasses the characterization of style according to
different time periods, as well as the attribution of tentative dates to literary
works. Stamou reviewed a large number of studies on this topic, discussing
literary works by writers such as the poet W.B. Yeats (Jaynes), or the prose
of Samuel Becket (Opas), to the lyrics of the Beatles (Whissell). The review
draws some important conclusions that are still valid today. The first is that
even though dating methods would eventually be most useful to date works
with an uncertain date of creation — such as texts by Plato, Euripides and
Shakespeare — these methods should be developed, tested and evaluated using
gold standard corpora (where texts can be reasonably associated with a precise
date of creation so as to get a solid performance evaluation), a criterion that
was already underlined by Forsyth. Despite this, there is a large literature on
the topic of stylochronometry with experiments investigating only works with
problematic dating (e.g. Cox and Brandwood; Wishart and Leach; T. M.
Robinson; Ledger; Temple on Plato’s works; Devine and Stephens; Cropp
and Fick; Smith and Kelly on Euripides, and Brainerd; Derks; Jackson on
Shakespeare), making it difficult to evaluate the results. Experiments in which
the methods used are carefully compared to reference corpora with known
dates are rather rare (however, see Can and Patton, on two modern Turkish
writers). Daelemans also underlines this evaluation problem and suggests using
evaluation methods from the field of Natural Language Processing (NLP). In
the same vein, Craig states that “stylistic analysis needs finally to pass the same
tests of rigor, repeatability, and impartiality as authorship analysis if it is to offer
new knowledge”.
Specifically for works on French, we came across studies using off-the-shelf
methods developed for statistical textual analysis (Pincemin), for instance stylo
R (Eder et al.), Lexico (Lamalle et al.), TXM (Heiden et al.), Le Trameur
(Fleury and Zimina), and Hyperdeep (Vanni et al.). For example, Guaresi et
al. study the evolution of style on a corpus of the annals of the congress of
the French communist party from 1936 to 2018 using correspondence analysis
on the vocabulary. However, a drawback of off-the-shelf methods is that they
provide mainly exploratory analyses or visualizations which leave considerable
room for interpretation and cannot be used directly to focus on specific
stylochronometry questions or hypotheses with a rigorous evaluation
Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

procedure. We will therefore not go into detail about this type of study but
will instead discuss more focused studies that have, in our opinion, developed
interesting and relevant approaches for the task.
Mollin investigated Tony Blair’s idiolect. Her goal was to identify ‘‘maximizer
collocations’’ (collocations involving adverbs such as fully, entirely or
absolutely) that were specific to Blair’s idiolect, when compared to the English
language in general (comparing a three million word corpus of Tony Blair with
the British National Corpus (BNC XML Edition)). Collocations were selected
using the three measures: relative frequency, Mutual Information (Church et
al.) and the log-likelihood measure (Dunning). A series of collocations that are
typical of Blair’s idiolect was identified using these three measures.
Mollin's article nicely combines quantitative and qualitative analysis and
presents a clear methodology. Unfortunately, we could not find an online
accessible repository of the Tony Blair Corpus, but the methods are explained
to an extent that the research should be replicable. Mollin's results suggest that
the notion of idiolect is indeed a relevant linguistic concept, and that there are
some linguistic patterns that are highly idiosyncratic for a speaker (even though
her study only included one individual).
A second researcher working on the notion of idiolect is Barlow. He studied
the idiolect of five White House Press Secretaries who held this function from
1 to 4 years. For each person the author collected a corpus of approximately
200K to 1200K tokens and compared the individual frequencies of the most
frequent bigrams (lexical and Part of Speech) of each press secretary against
the others. He showed that individual patterns are highly recognizable and that
inter-speaker variability is much larger than intra-speaker variability. Moreover,
he found that the inter-speaker differences were “core aspects of language and
not peripheral idiosyncrasies”, meaning that they play a role in the use of
function words and high frequency words, such as ‘by the’ and ‘we have’. He
also found that the speech of an individual remained remarkably stable over
time, but of course, one needs to keep in mind that the maximum period for a
secretary in the corpus was only four years.
Another study that concluded in favour of the staticness of the idiolect is
Meyerhoff and Walker. They tried to determine to what extent the grammar
of individuals is morpho-syntactically similar to that of a community. They
studied the absence of the verb ‘be’ in a community speaking an Englishbased creole compared to other members of this community who had joined
an urban community speaking a more ‘standard’ English. Their conclusions
are mixed, suggesting that, despite the possibility of the idiolect evolving,
conservatism can also play an important role. However, it should be noted
that this study only applied to one grammatical construction in a multilingual
setting, so that the reported results may be hard to generalize.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Evans wrote her PhD thesis on diachronic morpho-syntactic changes in the
idiolect of Queen Elizabeth I from a sociolinguistic perspective by comparing
her letters, speeches and translations (forming a corpus of 78K tokens) from
before her ascension to those from the period after this event, which is often
speculated to have had the greatest influence on Elizabeth’s language by other
scholars. Interestingly, Evans used a reference corpus — the Corpus of Early
English Correspondence (Raumolin-Brunberg and Nevalainen) — and
previous studies on it to identify 9 morpho-syntactic features present in this
corpus and the corpus of Queen Elizabeth. The goal was to see whether the
two corpora evolved in the same way. The author found that the ascension to
the throne only influenced two features (the increase in the use of the royal ‘we’
and the decrease in the use of periphrastic superlative adjectives), and that time
in general and the long education of Queen Elizabeth had a constant influence
on the development of her idiolect. Evans’ study provides a good example of
how corpus linguistics and qualitative analysis can jointly contribute to the
study of the evolution of the idiolect.
In the field of stylochronometry, the work of Klaussner and Vogel of 2015 and
2018 and Klaussner of 2017 should be mentioned. They developed regression
models and evaluated them on two individual corpora of North American
writers, a reference corpus and against a baseline. They used a machine learning
task that aimed to predict the year of writing of a given work, using a relevant
evaluation metric. Their methods play an important role in the second part
of our quantitative study (Section 5) and will therefore be discussed in more
detail below. However, we can already conclude that the methods proposed by
Klaussner and Vogel show how quantitative machine learning methods can be
used to fuel qualitative research on stylistic changes.
We have said that relevant large scale resources in this domain are scarce. We
should however mention a large recent resource: the EMMA corpus (Petré
et al.). It features 87 million words of prolific English 17th century writers.
Various studies on the evolution of the idiolect were conducted using this
resource, for example Petré and Van de Velde — although using an earlier
slightly smaller version of the corpus — investigated the role of individual
language users and the language community in the semantic and
morphosyntactic process of grammaticalization of a specific construction: ‘be
going to INF’. They show how the rate of this construction was influenced
before, during and after its conventionalization and observe differences
between generations. Their method shows how the process of
grammaticalization can be studied for individuals but also for a community
at the same time. Anthonissen and Petré also show how the use of larger
corpora helps to study lifespan changes affecting syntactic constructions; they
demonstrate by the example of the construction ‘be going to’ that individual
writers in the EMMA corpus can adopt and continue to participate in
grammatical innovations during adulthood.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Contrary to most of the studies examined in this section, our approach takes
into account all kinds of patterns (called motifs) and not only a handful of
predefined and carefully selected sequences. With this more comprehensive
approach, we hope to produce a more robust and reliable model of the
evolution of the idiolect.

3. Corpus
For this study, we used the Corpus for Idiolectal Research (CIDRE) (Seminck
et al.). This corpus features 11 French 19th and early 20th century prolific
fiction writers, with a total of 37 million words. All the works have been
carefully dated and the corpus includes only works of fiction, so that the
problem of individuals having different idiolects related to their social situation
does not interfere.
To address the question of diachronic language evolution in general in
opposition to idiolectal evolution, we assembled a ‘reference corpus’. This
corpus contains 361 works of fiction by French authors from the same time
period as the works in CIDRE, but no particular attention was paid to
individual authors: they can be included in the resource if they wrote only one
work. To assemble the reference corpus, we used the online tool GutenTag
(Brooke et al.) that enables one to download a subcorpus from Project
Gutenberg. With a semi-automatic approach to run GutenTag several times, to
filter sufficiently long books and to automatically date the first edition of each
work using the catalogue of the Bibliothèque nationale de France, we were able
to obtain a total of 361 works of fiction in French, dated with a reasonably
good precision (mean error of 1.71 years per book for books present in the
CIDRE corpus). The quality of this corpus can be considered sufficient for
it to be used as a reference corpus that serves to account for language change
in general. Note that there is a substantial overlap between the content of the
CIDRE corpus and our reference corpus (146 novels out of the 361).

4. Testing the rectilinearity hypothesis
In the introduction, we mentioned the rectilinearity hypothesis which posits
that some aspects of the idiolect evolve in a linear fashion over time and that
this evolution should be detectable. Importantly, the hypothesis does not say
that this evolution is relevant for all linguistic features and should affect the
same features for each individual. The use of some linguistic features may
remain stable, but some evolution should nevertheless be observed for some
others, contradicting the conservatist hypothesis (which assumes no linguistic
changes). Furthermore, we add the prediction that idiolects evolve constantly
and do not return to earlier stages, even if some linguistic features might.

4.1. Methods: Robinsonian Matrices
Robinsonian matrices are distance matrices that have cells whose values
increase when moving away from the diagonal. They were introduced in the
context of archeological deposits, to study the chronological evolution of the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Table 1. An example of a Robinsonian distance matrix: both (text1, text2) and (text2, text3) are lower than (text1, text3).

text1

text1

text2

text3

0

2

4

0

1

text2
text3

0

Figure 1. Illustration of the idea of Robinsonian distances between texts.
The colored dots (schema on the left) and arrows (schema on the right) represent distances. If the chronology of the text in the corpus is
reflected in the measured distances, we expect that max(δ(texti, textj), δ(textj, textk)) ≤ δ(texti, textk) is true.

style of pottery fragments (W. S. Robinson). More formally, applying this
concept to texts, given a matrix δ expressing the distance between novels, we say
that δ is Robinsonian if for any set of three distinct texts texti, textj and textk
such that date(texti) < date(textj) < date(textk),
max(δ(texti, textj), δ(textj, textk)) ≤ δ(texti, textk).
To evaluate the rectilinearity hypothesis on a distance matrix reflecting changes
in the idiolect, we measure to what extent the distance matrices corresponding
to the texts of the CIDRE corpus are Robinsonian. In order to do this, we can
compute the Robinsonian score, which we define as the percentage of triples of
cells (δ(texti, textj), δ(textj, textk), δ(texti, textk)), for which the inequality above
is verified.
It is also possible to estimate a p-value, i.e. the probability that a Robinsonian
score as high as the one being tested could be obtained by chance, by evaluating
this score again after randomly changing the order of the texts. Getting a low
p-value would support the rectilinearity hypothesis.
Before evaluating the rectilinearity hypothesis on the CIDRE corpus, we first
used a dated corpus of Maurice Leblanc as a testbed to compare different
feature representations for the texts and different ways of measuring distance.
We used tokens, characters, lemmas and so-called motifs (Legallois et al.) as
features. A motif is a sequence of lemmas and POS-tags. As function words
tend to be the most relevant features of idiolectal signals (Barlow), grammatical
information, i.e. function words and POS-tags, are crucial for the task.
However, the tagset of our part-of-speech tagger is not fine-grained enough,
losing important information for some categories. For example the difference

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Table 2. Examples of unigrams and bigrams and the different types of features
“Il est
fâcheux
que cela
traîne en
longueur…”

tokens

characters

lemmas

motifs

unigrams

[‘Il’, ‘est’,
‘fâcheux’, ‘que’,
‘cela’, ‘traîne’,
‘en’, ‘longueur’,
‘...’]

[‘I’, ‘l’, ‘ ’, ‘e’, ‘s’, ‘t’, ‘ ’, ‘f’, ‘â’,
‘c’, ‘h’, ‘e’, ‘u’, ‘x’, ‘ ’, ‘q’, ‘u’, ‘e’,
‘ ’, ‘c’, ‘e’, ‘l’, ‘a’, ‘ ’, ‘t’, ‘r’, ‘a’, ‘î’,
‘n’, ‘e’, ‘ ’, ‘e’, ‘n’, ‘ ’, ‘l’, ‘o’, ‘n’,
‘g’, ‘u’, ‘e’, ‘u’, ‘r’, ‘...’]

[‘il’, ‘être’, ‘fâcheux’, ‘que’, ‘cela’,
‘traîner’, ‘en’,
‘longueur’, ‘…’]

[‘il’, ‘être’, ‘ADJ’, ‘que’,
‘cela’, ‘PRES’, ‘en’, ‘NC’,
‘...’]

bigrams

[(‘Il’,‘est’),
(‘est’,‘fâcheux’),
(‘fâcheux’,‘que’),
(‘que’,‘cela’),
(‘cela’,‘traîne’),
(‘traîne’,‘en’),
(‘en’,‘longueur’),
(‘longueur’,‘...’)]

[‘Il’, ‘l ’, ‘ e’, ‘es’, ‘st’, ‘t ’, ‘ f’,
‘fâ’, ‘âc’, ‘ch’, ‘he’, ‘eu’, ‘ux’,
‘x ’, ‘ q’, ‘qu’, ‘ue’, ‘e ’, ‘ c’, ‘ce’,
‘el’, ‘la’, ‘a ’, ‘ t’, ‘tr’, ‘ra’, ‘aî’,
‘în’, ‘ne’, ‘e ’, ‘ e’, ‘en’, ‘n ’, ‘ l’,
‘lo’, ‘on’, ‘ng’, ‘gu’, ‘ue’, ‘eu’,
‘ur’, ‘r...’]

[(‘Il’,‘être’),
(‘être’,‘fâcheux’),(‘fâcheux’,‘que’),
(‘que’,‘cela’), (‘cela’,‘traîner’),
(‘traîner’,‘en’), (‘en’,‘longueur’),
(‘longueur’,‘...’)]

[(‘Il’,‘être’),
(‘être’,‘ADJ’),(‘ADJ’,‘que’),
(‘que’,‘cela’),
(‘cela’,‘PRES’),
(‘PRES’,‘en’), (‘en’,‘NC’),
(‘NC’,‘...’)]

between ‘un’ and ‘le’ (‘a’ and ‘the’) is ignored, and both are tagged as
determiners. We therefore used the following strategy: content words were
replaced with their POS-tags while function words were replaced with their
lemma. This approach allowed us to keep relevant linguistic information,
especially at the grammatical level. Legallois et al. proved that these motifs were
effective in finding author-specific style characteristics, making it possible to
identify interesting examples in corpus studies.
We compared different lengths of n-grams (unigrams to pentagrams) of tokens,
characters, lemmas and motifs (see Table 2 for examples of different types of
features). The texts of the corpus were represented by the top 500 features with
the highest relative frequency. The different distance metrics we used come
from stylo R (Eder et al.), in which we entered our corpora. Figure 2 shows
the percentage of the distance matrix (calculated for the Leblanc corpus) that is
Robinsonian for different feature configurations.
We therefore decided to detect the chronological signal in the corpora of
CIDRE and the reference corpus using motif trigrams and the canberra metric
as the default option, since trigrams are a medium size and the canberra metric
performed slightly better than the others. However, the choice of motifs was
motivated by the use of these features in the second series of experiments
presented next in this section and by the fact that the lower part of the error bar
in Figure 2 is at the highest level of all four tested features. The feature vectors
in this experiment contain the scores of the 500 features with the highest
relative frequencies.

4.2. Results
The scores for the different authors of the CIDRE corpus and the reference
corpus can be found in Table 3. To know whether these scores are meaningful,
we compared them with a distribution of random permutations of the distance
matrix. For 10 000 random permutations, we calculated the percentage that
obtained a Robinsonian score higher than the score of the actual distance
Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Figure 2. Robinsonian scores for different configurations of features used (eight different distance metrics, four different
types of features, five different lengths of n-grams).
Each combination of distance metric, type of features and length of n-gram was tested. Error bars represent the 95% confidence interval of
the mean score of all configurations that includes a given parameter. No configuration is significantly better than others. The highest result
of 0.50 is obtained using quadrigrams of lemmas with the canberra metric, but this experiment does not allow us to identify a combination
of features that is significantly the best to capture the chronological signal in the data.

matrix. Table 3 demonstrates that the distance matrices obtained are
significantly more Robinsonian for all the authors than random permutations,
except for Comtesse de Ségur.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Table 3. The Robinsonian scores for the authors in CIDRE and the reference corpus, followed by the probability of obtaining these scores by
chance if the chronological signal in the data is absent.
Corpus

Robinsonian
score

Probability of Robinsonian score if no chronological signal is present in the
data

Comtesse de Ségur

0.38

0.14

Daniel Lesueur

0.41

0.00

Pierre-Alexis Ponson du
Terrail

0.41

0.00

Gustave Aimard

0.42

0.01

Honoré de Balzac

0.44

0

Michel Zévaco

0.46

0

Jules Verne

0.47

0

George Sand

0.49

0

Paul Féval

0.49

0.00

Henry Gréville

0.62

0

Émile Zola

0.63

0

Reference Corpus

0.34

0

Decimal numbers come from rounding and plain zeros have not been rounded.

4.3. Discussion
First, it should be noted that the percentage of Robinsonian cells in the matrix
is dependent on the number of works in the corpus. Larger corpora lower the
probability of getting Robinsonianness by chance. Therefore, the score of 0.34
for the reference corpus seems low, but is actually very high for this number of
works. Second, it should be kept in mind that only the absolute order of works
plays a role in our method and that it does not take into account the exact
difference in years between works. That is to say: if max(δ(texti, textj), δ(textj,
textk)) ≤ δ(texti, textk) is false, it does not matter how much more max(δ(texti,
textj), δ(textj, textk)) is than δ(texti, textk).
The fact that different types of features produce similar results on the Maurice
Leblanc corpus is not that unexpected regarding the literature. Stamou
identified a number of stylistic markers that were of interest in many
stylochronometric studies, namely: punctuation, characters, part of speech
tags, most common words including function words, frequencies of selected
content words, hapax and vocabulary richness. She suggested that there might
not be a “single universal stylochronometer” that can apply to every corpus.
The results from our experiments show that there is a strong chronological
signal in the data, except for the corpus of Comtesse de Ségur. A possible
explanation for this exception could be that this corpus is too small,
representing only 3.8% of the total tokens in CIDRE. Another explanation
is that this corpus might be heterogeneous, as it includes children’s stories,
bible stories for children and fairy tales. However, in general our results are in
line with the rectilinearity hypothesis: the style of an author generally evolves
smoothly over time. No regression (texts stylistically similar to earlier texts) can
be observed.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

In the next section, we discuss our second series of experiments in which we
trained a linear regression model to automatically predict the date of writing of
various novels from our reference corpus.

5. Predicting Year of Writing using Linear Regression
In this section, we first examine the chronological evolution of the idiolect
(and the reference corpus) by training models on the corpora of idiolects in
CIDRE and then predicting the year of writing of different works using crossvalidation. The hypothesis is simple: if this type of experiment is successful,
the results are in favor of the rectilinearity hypothesis. In other words, the
frequency of some linguistic forms increases or decreases in a linear fashion
to such an extent that we can detect the year of writing. Second, we do not
just want to verify if there is a chronological signal, but also if we can identify
the linguistic material at the heart of this evolution. Therefore, we will present
a feature selection method that identifies the features that change the most
in frequency over time. These features will be used for the qualitative study
in section 6. Furthermore, besides these hypotheses and goals, we also have
the general objective of proposing new ways to evaluate stylometric methods.
For this purpose, we will have recourse to the state of the art literature on
linear regression models and verify that it can be used in the stylochronometry
context.

5.1. Methods: Regression Models
Various previous studies have used regression techniques in order to date
literary works. For example, Frischer used regression techniques (among other
methods) to date the Ars Poetica of Horace. However, by today’s standards, the
number of features in this regression was very low so we will mainly discuss
more recent work. A representative study using regression is Klaussner and
Vogel work from 2018 (henceforth K&V). They used it in a machine learning
task that consisted in predicting the year of writing of a work, focusing on two
corpora in English: the work of Henry James and that of Mark Twain. They
also used the years 1860-1919 of The Corpus of Historical American English
(COHA; Davies et al.) as a reference corpus to capture the ‘general’ language in
North America at the time, to check whether the changes detected in the work
of James and Twain were shared by the community or were idiosyncratic. Four
types of features were considered: character n-grams, part-of-speech tags, word
stems, and lemmas with POS-tags; for each of them unigrams to quadrigrams
were tested. This resulted in a total of 32 models (2 authors, 4 types of features
and 4 types of n-grams). On each model, the elastic nets algorithm was applied
to reduce the number of parameters. The models were evaluated using the
measure of root mean squared error (RMSE), which reflects the difference
(measured in years) between the prediction and the real year of writing. At this
point, note that one should keep in mind that this metric is quite sensitive to
outliers, as the error is squared. A baseline performance was also measured “by
using the mean of the data for the prediction of every instance”; meaning that
every work that was dated by the baseline received the same prediction (the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

mean of all training instances). This would correspond to a model that has a R²
score of 0 (Field). The best results were obtained by K&V using lemmas with
POS-tags in unigrams and bigrams.
Although our experiments share many similarities with K&V, we made some
different choices for our models. First, we used only motifs consisting of ngrams (unigram to pentagram, but all incorporated in the same model instead
of different models as in K&V). The notion of motif is anchored in previous
studies: it has been shown that they are helpful through qualitative analysis
(Legallois et al.). Second, the feature section algorithm we chose is Lasso LARS
(Efron et al.) with cross validation of 5 (80% training, 20% testing) and not
elastic nets. We chose this algorithm because our aim was not to find the
most compact model, unlike K&V, but a model that drastically reduces the
number of features so that they can be inspected manually (see our qualitative
study, Section 6 of this paper). Moreover, as a selection criterion of features,
we require that the features be present in at least 20% of an author’s texts,
whereas in the work of K&V, features had to be present in all data points. This
much lower threshold was chosen here because we think it is possible — at
least theoretically — for a language innovation to be totally new or for some
structures to entirely disappear. Also, K&V concatenated texts written in the
same year into one data point by putting the texts behind each other in the
same file, whereas we kept them as separate data points with the same value
for the year, since we believe that this better represents the data. However,
to ensure comparability with K&V, we decided to measure the RMSE and
the RMSE-baseline for our experiments. We also compared our results to our
reference corpus, and tried the algorithm of elastic nets,1 as well as elastic
nets cross validated.2 In the end, however, we found that Lasso LARS cross
validated performed much better on most of our corpora and that the number
of features it selected was better suited for qualitative studies (the elastic nets
selected either no features or thousands of features, making a qualitative study
impossible). Details about the comparison of feature selection algorithms can
be found in the supplementary material.3

5.2. Results
For every author, we measured the correlation between the actual year and
the predicted year and the value of R² (expressed between 0 and 1), which
represents the amount of variation of the data that is explained by the model
(Field). The results can be found in Table 4 and Figure 3. Excellent results were
obtained for Jules Verne, Émile Zola, George Sand, Henry Gréville, DanielLesueur and Honoré de Balzac: the models (selected n-grams of motifs) were
capable of predicting the large majority of the variation in the data. The models

1 https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.ElasticNet.html
2 https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.ElasticNetCV.html#sklearn.linear_model.ElasticNetCV
3 The filename is: ‘results_LassoLars_vs_ElasticNet.txt’.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Table 4. The regression experiment was very successful in explaining the variance of the corpora in gray, and considerable for the other corpora,
except for Pierre Alexis Ponson du Terrail, where it was inefficient.
Author

Correlation

R²

#β

RMSE

RMSE-b

Jules Verne

0.94

0.89

57

3.91

11.83

Remarks

Daniel-Lesueur

0.92

0.84

14

3.39

8.46

Émile Zola

0.92

0.83

34

4.50

11.02

Honoré de
Balzac

0.90

0.78

42

2.44

5.26

George Sand

0.88

0.77

61

6.13

12.78

Henry Gréville

0.78

0.55

31

2.85

4.27

Regressors in active set degenerate (1/5
folds)

Michel Zévaco

0.75

0.55

23

3.52

5.22

ConvergenceWarning: Regressors in
active set degenerate (2/5 folds)

Gustave Aimard

0.70

0.49

21

5.96

8.21

Paul Féval

0.51

0.26

17

8.72

10.14

ConvergenceWarning: Regressors in
active set degenerate (3/5 folds)

Comtesse de
Ségur

0.45

0.18

18

3.57

3.96

ConvergenceWarning: Regressors in
active set degenerate (1/5 folds)

Pierre Alexis
Ponson du
Terrail

-0.04

-0.55

10

5.69

4.57

Reference
corpus

0.84

0.70

208

11.30

20.50

explained a substantial amount of variation in the data for the authors Michel
Zévaco, Gustave Aimard, la Comtesse de Ségur and Paul Féval, but less than
half of it. Lastly, for Pierre Alexis Ponson du Terrail, the model was not able
to explain any variance in the data, and thus the experiment was not successful
at all. The same observations can also be made by comparing the evaluation
metric root mean squared error (RMSE) and the baseline metric (RMSEbaseline) put forward by K&V.
It is important to mention that the modelling does not always (completely)
converge for a given K-fold. This problem is mostly noticeable for Paul Féval.
There seems to be a relation between the performance and this issue, but
convergence cannot explain the poor performance of the model on the corpus
of Pierre Alexis Ponson du Terrail: all the models on this corpus converged.
We also had a look at which works were well predicted and which ones were
outliers. See for example Figure 4, where it can be seen that L’Auberge des
Saules by Daniel-Lesueur was predicted about 6 years too late, but Comédienne
exactly at the time it was written. Other figures in the same style can be found
in the supplementary material (directory plots_regression_par_auteur).

5.3. Discussion
The average proportion of each author in our whole corpus is 9% since we have
11 authors. Our results show that larger corpora (Sand: 15.3% of the whole
corpus, Verne: 14%, Zola: 13% and Zévaco: 10.5%) perform very well and that
smaller corpora obtain lower scores (Ségur: 3.8%, Aimard: 5.4%, Féval: 6.4%).
This suggests that Petré and Van de Velde are right when they say that corpus
size matters a lot, even if it does not explain why our worst performing corpus
Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Figure 3. The results of the regression experiment for all corpora in CIDRE, sorted by performance (left to right, top to
bottom).
The blue line represents a perfect correlation.

is Pierre Alexis Ponson du Terrail, which is a medium size corpus (representing
9.1% of the total size of CIDRE). However, it is possible of course that we are
not aware of certain circumstances in the publication process of the different
authors that might explain these results or that the dating of this corpus is of
lesser quality. For example, the literary work of Ponson du Terrail is less well
known than that of some other writers in CIDRE: his works were dated using
information mostly from Wikipedia, which is not as reliable a source as those
used for other authors. If the poorer dating of some novels by this writer is
the source of the failure of our model, it means that our method is sensitive
to individual data points. Indeed, going back to the previous experiment and
Table 3, we see that there is a highly significant chronological signal for this
corpus, which means that the approach works globally and that specific cases
of failure should be further investigated.
However that may be, for most of the authors we get a very high value of R²,
which means that the chronology can explain almost all the variance of the
models. This is confirmed by the fact that the value of RMSE is much lower
than the RMSE-baseline value. We can thus conclude that the results on all our
corpora minus one are in line with the rectilinearity hypothesis.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Figure 4. The result of the regression experiment for the corpus of Daniel-Lesueur with annotated data points on the
scatterplot.
The blue line represents a perfect correlation.

A second interesting result that we obtained is the number of features selected
per model (column #β in Table 4). For all the corpora in CIDRE the number
lies between 10 and 61, which are numbers that make it possible to examine all
the features of a corpus in a qualitative study. A direct comparison with K&V is
difficult, as we did not work on the same corpora. However, we observe that the
number of predictors per model (column #β in Table 4) has a smaller range for
the different models we developed (the models of K&V range from counting
1 predictor to 315). Nevertheless, it should be kept in mind that our feature
selection algorithm probably removes correlated features and that the random
seed plays a role in which ones. Therefore, for a complete qualitative study
of one author, it might be worthwhile repeating the regression experiment a
number of times with different random seeds.
The features that characterize the evolution of an author do not necessarily
have to be frequent. While some features are quite frequent, such as the
increasing motif ‘y’ (anaphor referring to a prepositional phrase beginning with
the preposition ‘à’) found for Zola, which obtains the relative frequency of
0.0027 at its maximum, some others, such as the decreasing motif ‘autrui’
(other people), have a low relative frequency, 0.0008 at its maximum. This
Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

conclusion is similar to a finding in Koppel and Schler, who found that
idiosyncratic features that play an important role in authorship attribution also
tend to be of low frequency. How we explore the features of the models will be
discussed in the next section.

6. A Qualitative Study of some Motifs Sensitive to Diachronic
Change
In this section, we look more closely at features selected by the regression
algorithm (presented in the previous section). These features, or motifs, are at
the heart of idiolectal evolution and are assumed to be easily interpretable. Let’s
examine if this is true.

6.1. Methods: Manual Inspection
We scrutinized the motifs relevant for four authors on whom our models
obtained good results: Balzac, Daniel-Lesueur, Sand and Zola (looking deeper
into the motifs attached to authors for whom we obtained poor results would
not make much sense). For these authors, we inspected whether the selected
motifs were interpretable by looking at examples from the corpus in context, to
see if they corresponded to meaningful linguistic patterns.
First, it is clear that some forms are not interpretable: in Balzac, for example,
there is a decrease in the use of adverbs over time, but the adverbial category
is relatively heterogeneous so that it is difficult to interpret this phenomenon.
The same can be observed with the motif “NC_,_avoir” (also in Balzac) which
increases; this motif is realized in sequences (patronne, avait - mistress, had;
frère, ont -brother, had; ciel, as - heaven, have ) of which, at first sight, nothing
really relevant can be said. Another group of difficult motifs in Balzac is the
more frequent use of the pronoun “on” (“on PRES”, “. on”, “ADJ que on”).
These patterns are hard to interpret, especially since the pronoun “on” has a
fairly wide range of referential values.
Another example from Zola concerns verbs such as bouleverser (to upset) and
convaincre (to convince), which have an increasing frequency over time. But
here again, there is no immediate explanation for this usage. However, we were
pleased to see that most motifs are interpretable (for example, we estimated
that about three quarters of the motifs retained for Zola were). In the rest
of this section, we will discuss some of the (groups of) motifs that we found
interesting, or that have been previously noticed by researchers of the field of
stylistic analysis.

6.2. Results
A number of interpretable motifs can be considered as stylemes. For example,
in Zola, there is a set of motifs organized around “. Et” (the conjunction “and”
at the beginning of the sentence): “. Et le NC être” ; “. Et, dès” ; “. Et ce être”
whose use increases, as shown in example 1:

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

(1) Quoi donc ? Était-ce la fin ? Un souffle glacé avait couru sur le
camp, anéanti de sommeil et d’angoisse. Et ce fut alors que Jean
et Maurice reconnurent le colonel de Vineuil […]
(Zola, La débâcle)
What then? Was it the end? An icy breath had run over the camp,
annihilated by sleep and anguish. And it was then that Jean and
Maurice recognized Colonel de Vineuil […]
This use (called the revival “et”) was noticed very early by stylisticians
(Thibaudet; but see Bordas and Badiou-Monferrand for modern accounts). It
is not considered an idiosyncrasy, since this motif was also used by Flaubert,
who can be said to have been imitated by Zola (Thibaudet; Gauthier). Flaubert
considered that it was “an old biblical tic which is annoying”.
Another set of motifs is, meanwhile, on the decline, including “NCCOR”, a
tag for parts of the human body, which are used in the physical description of
the characters (épaules; tête; main; yeux, etc. - shoulders; head; hand; eyes, etc.).
It is difficult to interpret the reason for this decrease; perhaps the form, or at
least its repetition, was considered a cliché by the author.
In the same way, in Sand, we also notice that motifs linked to units referring
to parts of the body tend to decrease, for example “NCCOR avec NCABS”:
et se jeta dans mes bras avec joie; Suzanne baissa la tête avec embarras…
and threw herself into my arms with joy; Suzanne lowered her head in
embarrassment. This motif associates a movement of the body with a feeling.
Again, this change could be considered to be due to the avoidance of a cliché,
but this is a hypothesis that will have to be verified in further analysis.
Among the positive motifs of Sand, we note these two forms (“, et, comme”,
“, et, si ce”) which share the same rhythmic pattern (see examples 2 and 3).
Without going into detail, these patterns may highlight the subordinate
sentence by a kind of tension (↗), while the main phase is constructed in
detension (↙).
(2) Après avoir fait quelques tours sous les galeries, il se crut
assez calme pour retourner à l’atelier, et, comme il redescendait
l’escalier des Géants, il se trouva tout à coup face à face avec le
Bozza.
(Sand, Les Maîtres mosaïstes)
After having taken a few turns under the galleries, he believed
himself calm enough to return to the workshop, and, as he went
back down the staircase of the Giants, he found himself suddenly
face to face with the Bozza.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

(3) Dès lors, j’espérais qu’elle pourrait aimer Narcisse, et, si cet
excellent jeune homme pouvait être heureux par elle, c’était à la
condition de ne plus souffrir du passé. (Sand, Narcisse)
From then on, I hoped that she would be able to love Narcisse,
and, if this excellent young man could be happy thanks to her,
it was on the condition of not suffering from the past anymore.
For Balzac, we found the decreasing motif “tout_à_NC” which corresponds in
the vast majority of cases to the adverb “tout à coup” all of a sudden. Again,
we suspect that the decrease of this motif could be caused by the avoidance
of clichés. An interesting example of increasing motifs of Balzac is the motif
“dire_à_NP” "say to Proper Name". When inspecting the corpus, we noticed
that this phrase is used in different ways: sometimes it is inserted inside a
dialogue as illustrated in example (4), often it is used to mark the transition
from narration to dialogue as in (5) and vice-versa, as in (6). We consider it
a stylistic means to dynamize the switches between narratives and dialogues.
Often this construction is used to put a long grammatical subject after the verb
and direct object (as in 4 and 6), which also creates a stylistic effect.
(4) Il ne faut pas demander à monsieur pourquoi il vient, dit à
Castanier une vieille portière, vous ressemblez trop à ce pauvre
cher défunt.
(Balzac, Melmoth reconcilié)
One shouldn’t ask this gentleman why he came, said an old
doorkeeper to Castanier, you look too much like the poor, dear
deceased.
(5) Le commandant, qui l’ étudiait, s’apercevant de cette
insensibilité, dit à Gérard : Le serin n’en sait pas long.
(Balzac, Les Chouans)
The commander, who was studying him, and noticed this
insensitivity, said to Gérard: The fool does not know much.
(6) J’attends la réponse, dit à Rastignac le commissionnaire de
madame de Nucingen.
(Balzac, Le père Goriot)
I’m waiting for an answer, said the commissioner of Madame de
Nucingen to Rastignac.
Finally, for Daniel-Lesueur, it is worth mentioning the increasing motif
“…_DETPOSS_NC_…” (see examples 7 and 8), by which a noun preceded by
a possessive determiner in between two ellipsis punctuation marks dramatizes
reported thoughts and speech by invoking a close relation mon enfant; ma
soeur; mon amie (my child; my sister; my friend).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

(7) Ah ! ma mère … ma mère … pensait Hervé, […]
(Daniel-Lesueur, Le Masque d’Amour II - Madame de Ferneuse)
Ah ! my mother … my mother… thought Hervé, […]
(8) Je suis perdue ! … Perdue ! … Ma chérie … Invente quelque
chose ! … Ah ! sauve-moi !
(Daniel-Lesueur, Justice de femme)
I’m lost! … Lost! … My darling… Think of something! … Ah!
save me!

6.3. Discussion
As already mentioned, not all the motifs identified automatically are
interpretable. Many, however, are stylistic in nature without it being possible to
determine whether these uses are a deliberate choice by the author, or whether
they are a form of automatism. To shed light on this question, a more precise
analysis involving literary expertise should be undertaken. Our analysis
provides the literary scholar, the stylistician and the linguist with statistically
relevant evidence of the evolution of certain forms. It is up to these specialists
to show correlations between forms, to propose interpretations. This type
of approach can provide an empirical basis for more theoretical research
(Philippe). Our hope is to have demonstrated that our method, which
combines the use of motifs and the feature selection method of Lasso LARS,
identifies a large number of stylistically interesting patterns and can be a useful
tool in the qualitative analysis of the evolution of the idiolect.

7. General Discussion and Future Work
7.1. Contribution of the Work
In this article we investigated the chronological evolution of the idiolect. We
examined whether support could be found for the rectilinearity hypothesis
which states that the evolution of the idiolect is rectilinear in time, and whether
the linguistic structures at the heart of idiolectal change could be identified.
Using the Corpus for Idiolectal Research (CIDRE), we developed two
methods that could help reach these goals. First, we introduced the idea of
evaluating to what extent the distance matrices of works of one author are
robinsonian. For ten out of eleven corpora in CIDRE, we found that the
Robinsonian score was significantly high, suggesting that chronology plays a
crucial role in the idiolect of an author. Second, we developed linear regression
methods to predict the year of writing of a work and selected linguistic features
that are key in the process of idiolectal change. We found that the majority
of regression models were highly successful, again supporting the rectilinearity
hypothesis. Third, these models allowed us to find a number of features (in
the form of motifs) that lent themselves to manual examination in a qualitative
study, demonstrating both the usefulness of these features and the validity of
our methods. We believe that the use of motifs is complementary to the use

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

of lemmas and tokens. As for example Brunet illustrates in his study of the
vocabulary used by Zola, using lemmas allows a researcher to interpret the
topics of a writer. In the present study we demonstrate that motifs, on the
other hand, might give more insights in stylistic forms.
We believe that working on the concepts of idiolect and chronological change
can have an impact on related research themes. Modeling the idiolect could be
useful, for example for the task of automatic text dating that was included in
the 2015 SemEval campaign: Task 7: Diachronic Text Evaluation (Popescu and
Strapparava). A corpus of snippets from newspaper articles dating from 1700
until 2010 was composed and the task consisted in dating these snippets. It
could be interesting to see if the idiolect plays a role and if it can enhance the
classification results.
A theme for which the concept of chronological variation could be interesting
is authorship attribution and authorship verification, which involves checking
whether a pair of documents are written by the same person (Kestemont et al.).
Nowadays, the chronology of the writing is not taken into account; only the
idiolect of each author in the corpus is modeled. It is quite possible, however,
that taking the date of writing into consideration would enhance the modeling.
Many different features have been explored to model the idiolect of authors
for this task: n-grams of words or characters (e.g. Stamatatos; Antonia et al.;
Sari et al.), syntactic structures (Sundararajan and Woodard; Zhang et al.) and
even discourse structure (Ding et al.) but we are not aware of models that take
idiolectal variance over time into account. However, especially for writers with
long careers, it could be meaningful.
In this study, we focused on methods and on the evaluation of results. We argue
that the use of standard corpora, baselines and evaluation metrics could help
enhance the comparability of studies in the field of stylometry and that this
would help the research community gain greater insight into the robustness of
the results. In our experiment on the Robinsonian matrices, we used random
results as a baseline. For research questions that have not yet been addressed in
the literature, this is a useful starting point, as shown in the work of Bulteau
et al., who developed two algorithms to estimate the probability that a tree
produced by a hierarchical clustering algorithm — for instance produced by
stylo R (Eder et al.) — reflects a chronological order by chance. In our
experiment using regression models, we compared our methods with those of
Klaussner and Vogel from their 2018 publication, using their baseline RMSE
and the standard baseline of regression models, R2 (Field).
An important contribution of this study is that it addresses questions of
evaluation. We have seen that the development of off-the-shelf-packages has
made it possible to shed new light on long-standing research questions. For
example Schmidt-Petri et al. used the rolling-classification algorithm from stylo
R (Eder et al.) to examine the contribution of Harriet Taylor Mill to the
essay On Liberty, which is officially contributed solely to John Stuart Mill,
Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

her husband. They found that there is stylometric evidence that she should
indeed be considered a co-author of the work. However, as stylo R does not
enable any statistical evaluation of the classification results, the authors had
no straightforward means of interpreting their reliability and had to undertake
considerable extra work to estimate the robustness of the results. We therefore
think that working on the question of evaluation of stylometric methods is a
topic in the field of stylometry that needs to be developed further and we hope
to have made a useful contribution to it.

7.2. Future Work
The most obvious future work that should result from this study is a detailed
qualitative analysis of the selected motifs in CIDRE, for which the regression
models obtain good results. These studies should also contain a detailed
comparison with the reference corpus in order to decide if the observed change
can be interpreted as a rather general diachronic language change or an
idiosyncrasy, using for example the methods that Mollin used to identify
idiosyncratic collocations. This should be done, however, in collaboration with
literary experts of the writers in question in order to compare the findings of
the method with what is already known in the field of stylometry and stylistics.
In addition to the identification of idiosyncratic motifs, collaborations with
literary experts would allow us to get a more precise interpretation of the
motifs of an author. Indeed, we could for example examine the role that
dialogs, narratives, and descriptions play when experts provide us with
theoretically and empirically motivated hypotheses on specific authors.
Another straightforward direction for future work is to repeat our experiments
on other text genres, for example drama or correspondence. We are considering
trying our methods on plays, for example by using the Théâtre Classique corpus
of Fièvre. However, as theatrical works might be influenced/written by the
actors in the plays, the idiolectal signal of the playwright may not be as strong
as for works of fiction. Correspondence could be interesting in order to
investigate idiolectal changes with respect to the addressee of the letter. We
could for example use the Corpus of Early English Correspondence
(Raumolin-Brunberg and Nevalainen) and the correspondence of George
Sand. Another advantage of using correspondence is that dating letters might
be more precise than dating works of fiction. However, it would probably
result in corpora that are significantly smaller than the corpora of the authors in
CIDRE. As we suspect a strong relation between corpus size and the statistical
power of the experiments, the success is not guaranteed for smaller corpora.
But on the other hand, the number of letters per author is probably higher than
the number of books in CIDRE, which could enhance the statistical power.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

A third direction for future work is to evaluate how different people influence
each other with their idiolects. Evans investigated how the idiolect of Queen
Elizabeth I was influenced by others. It could be interesting to develop a
methodology on how influence could be established between authors or even
between literary movements.

8. Conclusion
Our experiments demonstrate that there is a significant evolution of the
idiolect during an author’s lifetime. Our experiments also suggest that some
features evolve in a rectilinear manner, steadily increasing or decreasing as the
years go by. These features are sufficiently clear-cut to be used to date the year
of writing of a book very accurately. We therefore conclude that we found
strong support for the rectilinearity hypothesis and that the evolution of the
idiolect is a relevant type of intrapersonal variation that exists alongside the
strong signal of interpersonal variation. We thus dismiss the proposal that
idiolects are stable over time, even though it is true that not all linguistic
features evolve. A second contribution of our article is the development of
new methods for which we have demonstrated the usefulness in 1) assessing
the chronological signal of the idiolect in corpora and 2) identifying linguistic
structures that are at the heart of this evolution. These features can in turn be
used for qualitative studies with stylistic objectives.
Peer-Reviewers: Simon DeDeo, David Mimno
All scripts, supplementary materials and data used for our experiments are
available in the online Harvard Dataverse directory: https://doi.org/10.7910/
DVN/WCMZOK, except for the CIDRE corpus, that is freely available in the
following Zenodo repository: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4707812.

Acknowledgments
We thank the two reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions.
This work has been developed in the framework of the IRN (International
Research Network) Cyclades (Corpora and Computational Linguistics for
Digital Humanities). This work was also supported in part by the French
government under management of Agence Nationale de la Recherche as part
of the “Investissements d’avenir” program, reference ANR19-P3IA-0001
(PRAIRIE 3IA Institute) and reference ANR-16-IDEX-0003 (I-Site Future,
programme “Cité des dames, créatrices dans la cité”).
Submitted: February 02, 2022 EST, Accepted: April 26, 2022 EST

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

references
Anthonissen, Lynn, and Peter Petré. “Grammaticalization and the Linguistic Individual: New
Avenues in Lifespan Research.” Linguistics Vanguard, vol. 5, no. s2, June 2019, doi:10.1515/
lingvan-2018-0037.
Antonia, A., et al. “Language Chunking, Data Sparseness, and the Value of a Long Marker List:
Explorations with Word n-Grams and Authorial Attribution.” Literary and Linguistic Computing,
vol. 29, no. 2, May 2013, pp. 147–63, doi:10.1093/llc/fqt028.
Badiou-Monferrand, Claire. “Rémanence Des Et de Relance En Français Moderne et Contemporain:
Du ‘Résidu’ Au ‘Reliquat.’” Le Français Moderne, vol. 88, no. 2, 2020, pp. 295–312.
Barlow, Michael. “Individual Usage: A Corpus-Based Study of Idiolects.” Proceedings of LAUD
Conference, 2010.
Bloch, Bernard. “A Set of Postulates for Phonemic Analysis.” Language, vol. 24, no. 1, Jan. 1948, pp.
3–46, doi:10.2307/410284.
Bordas, Éric. “Et La Conjonction Resta Tensive. Sur Le et de Relance Rythmique.” Français
Moderne, vol. 73, no. 1, 2005, pp. 23–39.
Brainerd, Barron. “The Chronology of Shakespeare’s Plays: A Statistical Study.” Computers and the
Humanities, vol. 14, no. 4, Dec. 1980, pp. 221–30. Crossref, doi:10.1007/bf02404431.
Brooke, Julian, et al. “GutenTag: An NLP-Driven Tool for Digital Humanities Research in the
Project Gutenberg Corpus.” Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Computational Linguistics for
Literature, 2015, pp. 42–47, doi:10.3115/v1/w15-0705.
Brunet, Etienne. Le Vocabulaire de Zola. Slatkine, Champion, 1985.
Bulteau, Laurent, et al. “Reordering a Tree According to an Order on Its Leaves.” 33rd Annual
Symposium on Combinatorial Pattern Matching (CPM 2022), Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum
für Informatik, 2022. Google Scholar, doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CPM.2022.24.
Can, Fazli, and Jon M. Patton. “Change of Writing Style with Time.” Computers and the Humanities,
vol. 38, no. 1, Feb. 2004, pp. 61–82, doi:10.1023/b:chum.0000009225.28847.77.
Church, Kenneth, et al. “Using Statistics in Lexical Analysis.” Lexical Acquisition: Exploiting on-Line
Resources to Build a Lexicon, Psychology Press, 1991, pp. 115–64.
Cox, D. R., and Leonard Brandwood. “On a Discriminatory Problem Connected with the Works of
Plato.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), vol. 21, no. 1, Jan. 1959,
pp. 195–200. Crossref, doi:10.1111/j.2517-6161.1959.tb00329.x.
Craig, Hugh. “Stylistic Analysis and Authorship Studies.” A Companion to Digital Humanities, vol.
3, 2004, pp. 233–334.
Cropp, Martin, and Gordon Fick. “Resolutions and Chronology in Euripides: The Fragmentary
Tragedies.” Bulletin Supplement (University of London. Institute of Classical Studies), 1985, pp.
iii–92.
Daelemans, Walter. “Explanation in Computational Stylometry.” Computational Linguistics and
Intelligent Text Processing, edited by Alexander Gelbukh, vol. 7817, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2013, pp. 451–62. Crossref, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-37256-8_37.
Davies, Mark, et al. “The 400 Million Word Corpus of Historical American English (1810–2009).”
English Historical Linguistics 2010: Selected Papers from the Sixteenth International Conference on
English Historical Linguistics (ICEHL 16), Pécs, 23-27 August 2010, vol. 325, John Benjamins
Publishing, 2012, pp. 231–62, doi:10.1075/cilt.325.11dav.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Derks, Peter L. “Clockwork Shakespeare: The Bard Meets the Regressive Imagery Dictionary.”
Empirical Studies of the Arts, vol. 12, no. 2, July 1994, pp. 131–39. Crossref, doi:10.2190/
h489-jh64-lq8c-l4t1.
Devine, A. M., and Laurence D. Stephens. “A New Aspect of the Evolution of the Trimeter in
Euripides.” Transactions of the American Philological Association (1974-), vol. 111, 1981, p. 43.
Crossref, doi:10.2307/284118.
Ding, Steven H. H., et al. “Learning Stylometric Representations for Authorship Analysis.” IEEE
Transactions on Cybernetics, vol. 49, no. 1, Jan. 2019, pp. 107–21. Crossref, doi:10.1109/
tcyb.2017.2766189.
Dittmar, Norbert. “Explorations in ‘Idiolects.’” Amsterdam Studies in the Theory and History of
Linguistic Science Series 4, 1996, pp. 109–28.
Dunning, Ted E. “Accurate Methods for the Statistics of Surprise and Coincidence.” Computational
Linguistics, vol. 19, no. 1, 1993, pp. 61–74.
Eder, Maciej, et al. “Stylometry with R: A Package for Computational Text Analysis.” The R Journal,
vol. 8, no. 1, 2016, doi:10.32614/rj-2016-007.
Efron, Bradley, et al. “Least Angle Regression.” The Annals of Statistics, vol. 32, no. 2, Apr. 2004, pp.
407–99, doi:10.1214/009053604000000067.
Evans, Mel. Aspects of the Idiolect of Queen Elizabeth I: A Diachronic Study on Sociolinguistic Principles.
University of Sheffield, 2011.
Field, Andy. Discovering Statistics Using SPSS: Book plus Code for E Version of Text. SAGE
Publications Limited, 2009.
Fièvre, Paul. “Théâtre Classique.” Université Paris-IV Sorbonne Http://Www. Theatreclassique. Fr,
2007.
Fleury, Serge, and Maria Zimina. “Trameur: A Framework for Annotated Text Corpora Exploration.”
Proceedings of COLING 2014, the 25th International Conference on Computational Linguistics:
System Demonstrations, 2014, pp. 57–61.
Forsyth, R. “Stylochronometry with Substrings, or: A Poet Young and Old.” Literary and Linguistic
Computing, vol. 14, no. 4, Dec. 1999, pp. 467–78. Crossref, doi:10.1093/llc/14.4.467.
Frischer, Bernard. Shifting Paradigms New Approaches to Horace’s Ars Poetica. 1991.
Gauthier, E. Paul. “Zola as Imitator of Flaubert’s Style.” Modern Language Notes, vol. 75, no. 5, May
1960, p. 423, doi:10.2307/3039860.
Guaresi, Magali, et al. “Entre Rupture et Continuité, Le Discours Du PCF (1920-2020).” Histoire &
Mesure, vol. XXXVII–1, no. 2, Dec. 2021, pp. 125–62, doi:10.4000/histoiremesure.14904.
Heck, Richard. “Idiolects.” Content and Modality: Themes from the Philosophy of Robert Stalnaker,
Oxford University Press on Demand, 2006, pp. 61–92.
Heiden, S., et al. Manuel de TXM, Version 0.7.9. ENS de Lyon & Université de Franche-Comté,
2018, http://textometrie.ens-lyon.fr/files/documentation/
Manuel%20de%20TXM%200.7%20FR.pdf.
Jackson, MacD. P. “Pause Patterns in Shakespeare’s Verse: Canon and Chronology.” Literary and
Linguistic Computing, vol. 17, no. 1, Apr. 2002, pp. 37–46. Crossref, doi:10.1093/llc/17.1.37.
Jaynes, Joseph T. “A Search for Trends in the Poetic Style of WB Yeats.” ALLC Journal, vol. 1, 1980,
pp. 11–18.
Kestemont, Mike, et al. “Overview of the Cross-Domain Authorship Attribution Task at PAN 2019.”
CLEF (Working Notes), 2019.
Klaussner, Carmen. “Elements of Style Change.” University of Dublin, Ireland, 2017.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Klaussner, Carmen, and Carl Vogel. “Stylochronometry: Timeline Prediction in Stylometric
Analysis.” Research and Development in Intelligent Systems XXXII, edited by Max Bremer and
Miltos Petridis, Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 91–106. Crossref, doi:10.1007/
978-3-319-25032-8_6.
---. “Temporal Predictive Regression Models for Linguistic Style Analysis.” Journal of Language
Modelling, vol. 6, no. 1, Aug. 2018, doi:10.15398/jlm.v6i1.177.
Koppel, Moshe, and Jonathan Schler. “Exploiting Stylistic Idiosyncrasies for Authorship
Attribution.” Proceedings of IJCAI’03 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Style Analysis and
Synthesis, vol. 69, 2003, pp. 72–80.
Lamalle, C., et al. Lexico 3 Version 3.41 Février 03. Outils de Statistique Textuelle. Manuel
d’Utilisation. Laboratoire SYLED-CLA2T, Université de la Sorbonne nouvelle - Paris 3, 2003,
http://www.lexi-co.com/ressources/manuel-3.41.pdf.
Ledger, Gerard R. Re-Counting Plato a Computer Analysis of Plato’s Style. 1989.
Legallois, Dominique, et al. “The Balance Between Quantitative and Qualitative Literary Stylistics:
How the Method of ‘Motifs’ Can Help.” The Grammar of Genres and Styles: From Discrete to NonDiscrete Units, 2018, pp. 164–93.
Meyerhoff, Miriam, and James A. Walker. “The Persistence of Variation in Individual Grammars:
Copula Absence in ?Urban Sojourners? And Their Stay-at-Home Peers, Bequia (St Vincent and the
Grenadines).” Journal of Sociolinguistics, vol. 11, no. 3, June 2007, pp. 346–66. Crossref,
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9841.2007.00327.x.
Mollin, Sandra. “‘I Entirely Understand’ Is a Blairism: The Methodology of Identifying Idiolectal
Collocations.” International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, vol. 14, no. 3, Aug. 2009, pp. 367–92,
doi:10.1075/ijcl.14.3.04mol.
Opas, L. L. “A Multi-Dimensional Analysis of Style in Samuel Beckett’s Prose Works.” Research in
Humanities Computing 4., edited by S. Hocking and N. Ide, Clarendon Press., 1996.
Petré, Peter, et al. “Early Modern Multiloquent Authors (EMMA): Designing a Large-Scale Corpus of
Individuals’ Languages.” ICAME Journal, vol. 43, no. 1, Mar. 2019, pp. 83–122, doi:10.2478/
icame-2019-0004.
Petré, Peter, and Freek Van de Velde. “The Real-Time Dynamics of the Individual and the
Community in Grammaticalization.” Language, vol. 94, no. 4, 2018, pp. 867–901, doi:10.1353/
lan.2018.0056.
Philippe, Gilles. Pourquoi le style change-t-il? Les Impressions Nouvelles, 2021, doi:10.14375/
np.9782874498671.
Pincemin, Bénédicte. Sept Logiciels de Textométrie. 2018.
Popescu, Octavian, and Carlo Strapparava. “Semeval 2015, Task 7: Diachronic Text Evaluation.”
Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval 2015), 2015, pp.
870–78, doi:10.18653/v1/s15-2147.
Raumolin-Brunberg, Helena, and Terttu Nevalainen. “Historical Sociolinguistics: The Corpus of
Early English Correspondence.” Creating and Digitizing Language Corpora, edited by Joan C.
Beal, et al., Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2007, pp. 148–71, doi:10.1057/9780230223202_7.
Robinson, T. M. “Plato and the Computer.” Ancient Philosophy, vol. 12, no. 2, 1992, pp. 375–82,
doi:10.5840/ancientphil19921228.
Robinson, W. S. “A Method for Chronologically Ordering Archaeological Deposits.” American
Antiquity, vol. 16, no. 4, Apr. 1951, pp. 293–301, doi:10.2307/276978.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

The Evolution of the Idiolect over the Lifetime: A Quantitative and Qualitative Study of French 19th Century Literature

Sari, Yunita, et al. “Continuous N-Gram Representations for Authorship Attribution.” Proceedings of
the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Volume 2, Short Papers, 2017, pp. 267–73, doi:10.18653/v1/e17-2043.
Schmidt-Petri, Christoph, et al. “Who Authored On Liberty? Stylometric Evidence on Harriet Taylor
Mill’s Contribution.” Utilitas, vol. 34, no. 2, Dec. 2021, pp. 120–38, doi:10.1017/
s0953820821000339.
Seminck, Olga, et al. “The Corpus for Idiolectal Research (CIDRE).” Journal of Open Humanities
Data, vol. 7, 2021, p. 15, doi:10.5334/johd.42.
Smith, Joseph A., and Coleen Kelly. “Stylistic Constancy and Change across Literary Corpora: Using
Measures of Lexical Richness to Date Works.” Computers and the Humanities, vol. 36, no. 4, 2002,
pp. 411–30. Crossref, doi:10.1023/a:1020201615753.
Stamatatos, Efstathios. “On the Robustness of Authorship Attribution Based on Character N-Gram
Features.” JL & Pol’y, vol. 21, 2012, p. 421.
Stamou, C. “Stylochronometry: Stylistic Development, Sequence of Composition, and Relative
Dating.” Literary and Linguistic Computing, vol. 23, no. 2, Oct. 2007, pp. 181–99. Crossref,
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm029.
Sundararajan, Kalaivani, and Damon Woodard. “What Represents ‘Style’ in Authorship
Attribution?” Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 2018,
pp. 2814–22.
Temple, J. T. “A Multivariate Synthesis of Published Platonic Stylometric Data.” Literary and
Linguistic Computing, vol. 11, no. 2, June 1996, pp. 67–75. Crossref, doi:10.1093/llc/11.2.67.
Thibaudet, Albert. Gustave Flaubert. Éditions Gallimard, 1922.
Vanni, Laurent, et al. “Hyperdeep: Deep Learning Descriptif Pour l’analyse de Données Textuelles.”
JADT 2020, 2020.
Whissell, Cynthia. “Traditional and Emotional Stylometric Analysis of the Songs of Beatles Paul
McCartney and John Lennon.” Computers and the Humanities, vol. 30, no. 3, 1996, pp. 257–65,
doi:10.1007/bf00055109.
Wishart, David, and Stephen V. Leach. “A Multivariate Analysis of Platonic Prose Rhythm.”
Computer Studies in the Humanities and Verbal Behavior, vol. 3, no. 2, 1970, pp. 90–99.
XML, BNC. The British National Corpus XML Edition DVD. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2007, http://www.natcorp.ox.ac.uk/docs/URG/.
Zhang, Richong, et al. “Syntax Encoding with Application in Authorship Attribution.” Proceedings of
the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2018, pp. 2742–53,
doi:10.18653/v1/d18-1294.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

