Kleymann, Rabea, et al. “Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-Based Study of ‘Theory’ in Digital
Humanities Journals.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 7, no. 4, Dec. 2022,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.55507.

ARTICLE

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital
Humanities Journals
Rabea Kleymann1 , Andreas Niekler2 , Manuel Burghardt2
1 Leibniz Center for Literary and Cultural Research, 2 University of Leipzig

Keywords: DH theory, conceptual history, epistemic cultures
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.55507

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 7, Issue 4, 2022

The status of theory in the Digital Humanities (DH) has been the subject of
much debate. As a result, we find different theory narratives competing and
entangled with each other. If at all, these narratives can only be grasped and
examined from a somewhat detached perspective. Here, we attempt to
investigate these elusive narratives by means of a conceptual history approach.
In doing so, we define different theory dimensions, ranging from specific
cultural and literary theory frameworks to more generic uses of the concept of
theory. We examine the use and semantic changes of these theory notions in a
large corpus of DH journals. Using a mixture of heuristic methods and
approaches from the field of distributional semantics, we aim to create tellable
conceptual stories of DH theory.

1. Introduction
In his provocative 2008 text on the “end of theory,” Chris Anderson asked
whether the ubiquity of data could make theory-building obsolete altogether.
This question seems to be particularly relevant for the Digital Humanities
(DH), where metaphors such as “distant reading” (Moretti), “macroanalysis”
(Jockers), and “culturomics” (Michel et al.) indicate a strong focus on
empirical and data-driven approaches. Indeed, Anderson’s thesis is also
echoed in many DH debates; for instance, in the common narrative of a posttheoretical era that entails a “lack of theory” (Kleymann) in favor of an overly
“positivist methodological fetishism” (Arnold).
A closer look, however, clearly shows that the issue of DH theorizing has
played and continues to play a central role in the community (Warwick).
Typically, theories and theorizing are called into question in order to reflect
epistemological stances within DH research, with Matthew K. Gold even
asking “does DH need theory?” Johanna Drucker, however, suggests that be
reformulated, as “the question is not, does digital humanities need theory?
But rather, how will digital scholarship be humanistic without it?” According
to Drucker, theoretical constructs could be regarded as humanistic
safeguards, as “humanistic theory provides ways of thinking differently,
otherwise, specific to the problems and precepts of interpretative knowing
– partial, situated, enunciative, subjective, and performative.” A similar view
was later expressed by Rafael C. Alvarado, who speaks of theories as a

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

unique feature of DH scholarship, suggesting that “digital humanists may
reconnect with the production of theory, an area where the humanities and
interpretive social sciences have developed expertise.” As Alvarado notes,
theoretical underpinnings are an essential feature distinguishing DH from
data science. Demanding more theoretical interventions from DH
scholarship seems to be one trajectory within the debate.
In addition, DH theories are discussed with regard to timing issues. Following
wider post-theoretical narratives since the 1980s, a post-theoretical era has
also been heralded within DH scholarship, with Tom Scheinfeldt arguing that
“the time for theory is over, in the sense it is now the time for methodology”
(qtd. in Hall). Ted Underwood, however, claims that DH simply missed the
right moment for theoretical ventures (66). Contrary to appeals for a posttheoretical state, there are also arguments for a pre-theoretical state. Julia
Flanders and Fotis Jannidis state that “a theory of digital humanities cannot
simply coincide with its praxis. It can […] very probably learn a lot from
older theories […] but first of all it must be founded in a very close look at
the activities of digital humanists” (3). Moreover, Gary Hall remarks that the
argument that “critical and self-reflexive theoretical questions about the use
of digital tools and data-led methodologies should be deferred for the time
being” has become prominent within DH.
What now lies before or after theory formation is similarly determined by
focusing on praxeological perspectives. In this context, further dichotomies
such as “saying and doing” and “building” (Endres) versus writing are
introduced. Particularly prominent is the phrase “more hack, less yack”
(Warwick 538), which highlights another realm of the debate, namely the
textual form or linguistic condition of theories in the humanities. In other
words, the entanglement of theory and textual practices seems to be outdated,
while new forms, such as “materialist epistemology” (Ramsay and Rockwell)
or “materialized contemplative knowledge” (El Khatib et al. 2), have started
to appear.
Oscillating between celebration, regrets, and hesitation, theories continue to
diversify within DH research (Elliott and Attridge 2). Given these ambivalent
views of the role and function of theory in DH, we would like to attempt
a form of analysis that has received little attention so far. Specifically, in
this article, we will use the framework of conceptual history to investigate
narratives concerning DH theory. Beyond literary framings, we define
narrative as a form of ordering pattern for knowledge production within
scientific discourses. The suggestion that there could be a science narrative,
as Marie-Laure Ryan puts it, “carries the implication that scientific discourse
does not reflect, but covertly constructs reality, does not discover truths,
but fabricates them according to the rules of its own game” (344). Such
an understanding ties in with Science and Technology research since the
1980s, which has focused on narrative structures within epistemic cultures

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

(Knorr Cetina; Latour and Woolgar). The narrative of an “end of theory,”
for example, not only gains relevance in mediating knowledge and practices
within DH’s epistemic cultures, rather, such grand narratives or master
narratives, following Jean-François Lyotard’s conception, provide specific
epistemological and social settings for knowledge production. Within this
framework, storytelling, on the one hand, can be regarded as organizing
and mediating knowledge in research (Brandt 215). On the other hand,
researchers, as Rom Harré points out, become storytellers sketching out
storylines to contextualize their research (81–89).
Accordingly, we address two research questions in this article: 1) What kind
of narratives are linked to the concept of theory in DH’s epistemic cultures?
and 2) What kind of epistemological struggles and semantic paradoxes are
entangled with theory in DH? Our approach is founded on two premises.
On the one hand, we proceed from the premise that theory can be regarded
as a concept in terms of conceptual history approaches. Moreover, we assume
that the theory discourse in DH can be addressed as a research problem
of conceptual history approaches. As Ernst Müller and Falko Schmieder
remark, conceptual history—grasped here as a history of science—assumes
that single concepts within a scientific community are not only strongly
shaping research environments (Müller and Schmieder, “Begriffsgeschichte
und Wissenschaftsgeschichte” 89), but that expectations, practices, and
interpretations are manifested in their usage (Begriffsgeschichte und Historische
Semantik 604). On the other hand, applying a conceptual history approach to
DH is premised on the assumption that DH can already be historicized. Here
we follow Müller and Schmieder’s argument that theory could be regarded as
a “cipher or abbreviation for heterogeneous meanings and argumentations”
1
(Begriffsgeschichte 74), applying it to DH research. Therefore, this article
deploys the argument that the concept theory brings into sharper relief
characteristics of DH as an epistemic culture (Malazita et al.).
Conceptual history (or begriffsgeschichte) falls under the umbrella term of
historical semantics, but it is also a method particularly associated with
the work of Reinhart Koselleck, among others. Neighboring methods are
discourse analysis, metaphorology, and the history of ideas (Müller and
Schmieder, Begriffsgeschichte 122). One research focus of conceptual history
is to investigate how concepts are formed, perceived, and incorporated in
time. Concepts reflect and address social structures, while, as Kai Vogelsang
notes, they themselves influence reality, “shaping the way it perceives itself
and constituting patterns by providing models for action and increasing the
likelihood of their usage” (16).

1 All German references are translated by the authors of this paper. The authors of the paper are entirely responsible for translation errors.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Recently, conceptual history approaches have been discussed in the natural
language processing (NLP) community, leading to the idea of an approach
called digital begriffsgeschichte. Our methodological framework for the
investigation of theory takes up this thread, as it combines conceptual history
with computational approaches from distributional semantics. The aim of
this paper is therefore twofold. On a discursive level, it presents and reflects
(partial) perspectives on the theory discourse in order to uncover latent
epistemological settings within the DH. On a methodological level, however,
it brings to the fore the premises, implications, and pitfalls of linking
conceptual history approaches with computational methods that are inspired
by frequency analysis and distributional semantics (Wevers and Koolen 226).
The paper is largely organized around the presentation of two case studies,
which serve as the first steps into a conceptual-historical inquiry of theory
in DH research. Before embarking on this main task, however, in Section
2, we first discuss prior attempts to operationalize conceptual history in
a computational way. The two case studies “Theory frameworks in DH
research” and “Semantic spaces of theory and related concepts” are presented
in Section 3. In closing, we reflect on the results and provide some concluding
remarks.

2. Computational approaches to conceptual history
In this section, we provide an overview of approaches that use conceptual
history in combination with computational techniques. As noted above,
the emergence of conceptual history in general was coined and significantly
developed by Koselleck. Müller and Schmieder, Kathrin Kollmeier, and Frank
van Vree et al. have also provided concise introductions to the topic. Here,
however, we show that an increasing number of approaches can be designated
digital begriffsgeschichte.
Alexander Friedrich and Chris Biemann are among the first to have enhanced
the conceptual history approach with computational techniques. They
explore quantitative, semi-automatic approaches to digital conceptual history,
analyzing the concepts net, network, and networking. One issue that Friedrich
and Biemann already raise is the operationalization of semantic ambiguity,
especially in abstract concepts and metaphors. Methodologically, the authors
propose a prior, knowledge-free meaning induction (in German:
vorwissensfreie Bedeutungsinduktion).
A similar approach has been provided by Silke Schwandt, whose paper
seeks to highlight “the relevance of digital methods for historical semantics,
using the Latin term virtus and its medieval use as an example” (107).
In her conceptual-historical study, Schwandt presents a computational
semasiological approach that relies on cooccurrence analyses using Voyant
Tools (Sinclair and Rockwell), among others. Furthermore, she also proposes
onomasiological procedures that enhance discursive addressing of keywords.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

A comparable approach can be found in Daniel Burckhardt et al.'s study,
where diachronic collocation information is used to induce semantic change
of words. There the authors employ the DiaCollo tool to investigate historical
semantics used in the GDR’s (German Democratic Republic) press language.
In another study, Peter De Bolla et al. propose an interesting computational
approach that relies on cooccurrence information of words to construct a
measure for “conceptual coherence” (75). This approach allows them to
identify more complex verbal constellations that might comprise “concepts.”
Their proposed measure builds on pointwise mutual information (PMI),
which is a popular measure of association, to which they add a smoothing
exponent in the denominator.
Another computational approach that very much focuses on the history of
ideas is presented by Arianna Betti and Hein van den Berg, who introduce
a new methodological approach which they describe as a “model approach
to the history of ideas” (812). Christian Haase et al. provide an interesting
approach to investigate the lexical change of words, as they cluster the senses
of different words in a diachronic way, using a network approach called
neighborhood-graph over time. In this way, they can visualize the formation
and change of the meaning of words using their exploratory SCoT (Sense
Clustering over Time) tool.
Yet another approach, this time focusing on state-of-the-art word embeddings
and their application for historical research questions, can be found in
an article by Melvin Wevers and Marijn Koolen. There, the authors not
only provide a general insight into the function and significance of wordembedding models; rather, they also discuss conceptual-historical example
analyses for the terms democracy and abortion. In addition to word
embeddings as analytical tools for conceptual history, as Wevers and Koolen
suggest, they can also address questions of semantic change.
This review of related work shows that there have been attempts to apply
a computational conceptual history and that these can mostly be found
in the areas of digital history and computational linguistics (approaches
to lexical and semantic change). Tools like SCoT allow for a very detailed
and exploratory examination of how a word’s meaning changes in detail,
but unfortunately this seems inappropriate as an operationalization to our
context of discovery; namely, the quantitative temporal mapping of a change
in meaning. Since we are interested in determining larger-scale conceptual
changes, we believe the word embeddings approach described by Wevers
and Koolen appears to be the most promising for an investigation of DH
epistemic culture and, more specifically, the role of theory in DH.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

3. Tellable conceptual stories of DH theories
In this section, we present two tellable conceptual stories of theory in DH.
While the terms narrative and story are often synonymously used in everyday
2
language, we regard our case studies only as seeds for possible storylines.
Contrary to metanarratives in science, which are “presumed to uniquely
comprehend or in practice govern a culture” (Plotnitsky 516), our conceptual
stories are locally situated and merely suggest possible theoretical formations.
In other words, these case studies provide an opportunity to shift attention
away from dominant narratives, such as “the end of theory,” to potentially
more differentiated and nuanced stories within DH’s research. In doing so,
we ask to what extent stories are entangled with theory and whether these
conceptual stories are worth telling (Baroni)?
Because theory as a concept is simultaneously ambiguous, indispensable, and
controversial, but also marks intersections between traditional disciplines and
has already undergone semantic changes in the context of DH (“theory
in practice”), we believe that it is highly appropriate for our inquiry. As
a concept, theory cannot be easily defined or translated in DH research.
Therefore, we argue that theory in DH can only be narrated, if at all.
Case study 1 offers a semasiological perspective, while case study 2 offers a
more onomasiological perspective, which deals with semantic shifts of the
term theory and related concepts. More precisely, case study 1 focuses on the
semantic and discursive scope of theory, which we trace through frequencies
and cooccurrences of theory references. In case study 2, we are concerned
with a temporal internal structure (or propositional system) of the term
theory. We create contextual word embeddings of the term and examine how
they have developed or transformed in DH research, as well as exploring
which concepts can be identified as nearest neighbors. The methodology of
our two case studies is inspired by a related project called “The Trace of
Theory”, in which Geoffrey Rockwell et al. investigate keywords from the
domain of literary theory in large text collections by means of a (1) dictionary
approach as well as (2) a machine learning approach.
Our corpus-based study relies on academic publications in the field of DH.
Most of the scholarly communication in DH takes the form of conference
abstracts and articles in dedicated journals. While there is a growing collection
of abstracts from various past conferences being added to “The Index of
Digital Humanities Conferences” (Weingart et al.), this resource until now
has many blind spots, as indexing is still in progress. For this reason, we have
chosen instead to rely on journals (see Table 1).

2 Contrary to narrative theory, Seymour Chatman distinguishes between narrative, story, and discourse. In his definition, story (histoire or

fabula) and discourse (or récit or syuzhet) are two dimensions of narratives (9).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Table 1. Overview of journals and the overall corpus composition.
Journal

Time span

Articles

Tokens

Computers and the Humanities (ComHum)
https://link.springer.com/journal/10579/

1966–2004

1,560

approx.
6.8 million

Digital Humanities Quarterly (DHQ)
http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/

2007–2019

418

approx.
3.4 million

Literary and Linguistic Computing (LLC)

1986–2014

1,454

approx.
2.0 million

Digital Scholarship in the Humanities (DSH)
https://academic.oup.com/dsh

2014–2020

305

approx.
6.9 million

3,737

approx.
19.1 million

Total

3

The journals studied here are all well-established in DH and cover a time
span from 1966 to 2020 (see Figure 1). The journal that goes furthest back
in time is Computers and the Humanities (CHum), which was renamed
Language Resources and Evaluation (LRE) in 2005. However, we decided
to exclude LRE from the corpus, as it has an explicit focus on linguistics
and therefore is not representative for DH as a whole. To compensate for
this gap, we decided to add Digital Humanities Quarterly (DHQ), which has
been around since 2007. The final journal studied is Literary and Linguistic
Computing (LLC), which was renamed in 2015 to Digital Scholarship in the
Humanities (DSH), at which point its thematic focus became rather broader,
explaining why we kept it in the corpus.

3.1. Theory frameworks in DH (case study 1)
Although DH is a highly ambiguous term with many different definitions
(Terras), all DH approaches share a basic humanities perspective. Theory
within DH research often refers to specific theoretical frameworks (e.g.,
poststructuralism) or their representatives (e.g., Michel Foucault), which
are the focus of our analysis in this first case study. More concretely, we
seek to answer the following questions: In how many articles does theory
or any reference to a humanities approach to theory appear? How often
is a specific theoretical framework referenced within a document? Which
theoretical concepts cooccur and thus indicate theory clusters within DH
research?

3 These journals have been used for similar studies; for example, see Jan Luhmann and Manuel Burghardt, “Digital Humanities – A Discipline

in Its Own Right? An Analysis of the Role and Position of Digital Humanities in the Academic Landscape,” Journal of the Association for
Information Science and Technology 73, no. 2 (2021): 148–71, https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24533; Jan Luhmann and Manuel Burghardt,
“Same Same, but Different? On the Relation of Information Science and the Digital Humanities: A Scientometric Comparison of Academic
Journals Using LDA and Hierarchical Clustering,” in Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium of Information Science (ISI2021):
“Information between Data and Knowledge – Information Science and its Neighbors from Data Science to Digital Humanities” (2021):
173–200; Chris Alen Sula and Heather V. Hill, “The Early History of Digital Humanities: An Analysis of Computers and the Humanities
(1966–2004) and Literary and Linguistic Computing (1986–2004),” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities 34, no. 1 (2019): 190–206,
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqz072.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Figure 1. Overview of the temporal distribution of journal articles in our corpus.

dictionaries of humanistic theory frameworks
Two limitations arose in the context of our experimental design. First, we
have used an edited list of theory frameworks and representatives, which we
then systematically searched in our corpus. We decided to use a manually
edited list of theory frameworks, as we encountered various problems when
using only high-level concepts (such as structuralism or postcolonialism),
because many of the articles instead mention typical representatives of the
specific theoretical currents—for example, one tends to find Eichenbaum
rather than formalism. Second, our corpus of DH journals is certainly not
meant to be representative of all DH scholarly communication. Since it is
impossible to survey the entirety of theory frameworks in the humanities, we
have chosen literary and cultural theories as a representative subfield.
To investigate this subfield we created dictionaries, which are based on three
widely used introductory works to literary theory: Selden et al., Rivkin and
Ryan, and Castle. Selection criteria included an assumed degree of familiarity
and dissemination of the introductory works (such as the number of editions
and citations). Our selection focused less on a diversification of the theoretical
canon and thus shows a rather strong gender and diversity imbalance (Risam
17). The dictionaries are structured as follows: each dictionary contains an

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

umbrella term for the theoretical approach, typical representatives (“name
and surname” as well as “surname” only), and common multi-word
4
combinations.
Our dictionaries provide heuristic tools that allow us to address potential
discursive intersections of theory. Please note that we do not intend to
accurately reproduce individual branches of theory by means of
representative authors, but rather to generate a generic inventory of relevant
terms that are suitable to represent the typical use of theory in the
humanities. Furthermore, we do not claim that these dictionaries are
exhaustive or representative of all theory frameworks that might be used in
DH. Our compilation of traditional textbooks is rather a first attempt to
address the question of what DH scholars probably mean when they talk
about theory. We believe that our dictionaries provide first insights into the
nature of theory in DH research, because they serve as syntheses of high-level
concepts and representatives for literary and cultural theories.
In total, 13 unordered dictionaries were aggregated on the basis of their
tables of contents, including names of theoretical approaches and schools as
well as some of their representatives. Furthermore, we added hermeneutics,
which was not explicitly part of the three mentioned introductory books, but
which we frequently observed in our corpus during the first experiments. The
final list of 14 theory frameworks, along with one representative given as an
exemplar of each, runs as follows:
1. Formalism and New Criticism (Boris Eichenbaum, …)
2. Structuralism (Ferdinand de Saussure, …)
3. Phenomenology, Rhetoric, and Reader-oriented Theories (Edmund
Husserl, …)
4. Marxist Theory (Georg Lukács, …)
5. Poststructuralism (Michel Foucault, …)
6. Critical Race Theory and Ethnic Studies (Lisa Lowe, …)
7. Postcolonial Studies (Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, …)
8. Psychoanalysis (Julia Kristeva, …)
9. Political Criticism (Antonio Gramsci, …)
10. Gender and LGBTQ+ Studies (Judith Butler, …)

4 For the full dictionaries see “Dictionaries (Markdown)” at https://theory-in-dh.github.io/conceptual_forays/JoCA2022/

conceptual_forays_supplementary.html

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

11. Feminist Theory (Coppélia Kahn, …)
12. Cultural Studies and Critical Theory (Theodor Adorno, …)
13. Historicism (Stephen Greenblatt, …)
14. Hermeneutics (this was used as an additional meta category; no
specific representative authors were defined for this dictionary)
Finally, ambiguity was addressed in several ways. First, although in Selden et
al.'s Reader theoretical constructs or other umbrella terms, such as metaphor
or sexual politics, appear alongside names of theories and representatives, we
elected not to include these constructs in our dictionaries because of their
semantic ambiguity. Second, we also removed some names that were highly
ambiguous; for instance, (Walter) Benjamin, whose last name is also a first
name that appears in multiple articles. Third, classifications of representatives
are not always clear-cut as they may appear in two or more dictionaries at the
same time (e.g., Michel Foucault). In such cases, we manually selected what
we assumed to be the most representative dictionary. Lastly, we split Rivkin’s
“Feminism” and “Gender studies” and Selden et al.’s “Feminst theories” and
“Gay, lesbian, queer theories” categories into two dictionaries called “Gender
5
and LGBTQ+ Studies” and “Feminist Theory.”

frequency analyses
Searching for the items from our dictionaries, we found that at least one of
the specific cultural and literary theory terms appears in 793 articles of a total
of 3,737 articles in the corpus. We found additional verbatim occurrences
for theory and theories (1,037) that were not part of our dictionaries (see
Figure 2). In order to get a rough overview of the share of further theory
frameworks, we searched for all instances of “theory + of,” “noun + theory/
ies,” and “adjective + theory/ies,” which, for the most part, brings to the fore
further theory frameworks that go far beyond the scope of our dictionaries
for cultural and literary theory. Not only did we find numerous other
humanistic theories (e.g., “theory of meaning,” “theory of textuality,” “theory
of genres,” “theory of metaphor,” “theory of lexical diffusion”), we also found
theories from other domains and disciplines (e.g., “information theory,”
“graph theory,” “evolution theory,” “game theory,” “chaos theory”). In followup studies, we will systematically extract other theory frameworks and
produce further dictionaries and augment them with representative
theoreticians from Wikipedia and Wikidata (Gutiérrez de la Torre et al.).

5 We are aware that the language to describe spectrums of gender and sexuality is still changing (Thelwall et al.; Cameron and Kulick). In

addition to this, we would like to point out that such categorizations, like our dictionaries, are starting points for bias in data capturing
(D’Ignazio and Klein 97).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Figure 2. Overview of theory references in our corpus of DH journal articles.

These simple figures are by themselves already telling, as it shows that almost
half the articles (48.97%) mention theory in one way or another, thereby
already challenging the popular narrative that DH may lack theory (Cecire).
That said, it is obvious that the mere mention of theory does not
automatically entail an actual application or development of a theory. This is
why we wanted to take a closer look at the use of specific theory frameworks
from traditional humanities disciplines.

type-token-ratio (ttr)
After some corpus-wide frequency analysis, we took a closer look at the
frequency of theory references in single documents. More concretely, we
were interested in how often a dictionary item is used within one article.
As a measure, we adopted the type-token-ratio (TTR), which is popular in
quantitative linguistics to analyze the complexity of language by means of
its vocabulary performance (Hess et al.). TTR distinguishes types, which are
the number of unique words in a text, and tokens, which are the actual
realizations of one type in a text. The TTR is calculated by dividing the
number of types by the number of tokens. We obtained results in the range
of 0 to 1, where values toward 1 can be interpreted as having high lexical
variety. An actual score of 1 would mean that every type of a text is realized
by exactly one token; that is, every word used in the text is unique.
For our case of investigating the frequency of theory references within
different documents, we calculated TTR exclusively for the theory items of
our dictionary, not for the whole document texts. A TTR of exactly 1 here
would mean that each theory type is realized by exactly one token, which
could be interpreted as a rather shallow reference to the theory framework, as
Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Table 2. Overview of the ten-most-frequent dictionary terms with regard to their document frequency.
theory framework /
representative scholar

document frequency
(type count)

token
count

avg. token
count

standard deviation avg.
token count

hermeneutics

126

600

4.76

1.08

linguistic theory

87

339

3.90

0.46

cultural studies

86

465

5.41

1.35

roland barthes

78

161

2.06

0.49

new critics

66

271

4.11

2.29

critical theory

62

104

1.68

0.31

michel foucault

59

127

2.15

0.58

jacques derrida

54

135

2.50

0.80

phenomenology

34

58

1.71

0.72

sigmund freud

33

60

1.82

0.58

one would assume that an article that heavily relies on theoretical references
to, for instance “Roland Barthes,” would mention him more than just once
in the paper. Interestingly, this happens to be the case for 34.8% of articles
that have at least one specific theory reference. This shows that most of
the documents with a TTR=1 reference exactly one specific theory item,
one single time (222). In a few cases, we found two (40), three (11), or
four (2) theory references being mentioned exactly one time each. As only
a comparatively small number of articles (222) picks up one specific theory
reference from our dictionaries only once within the whole article, this might
lead to the conclusion that most DH articles do indeed address the topic of
theory in more than just a cursory way. This assumption is also reflected by
the document frequencies (type count) and total occurrences (token count)
6
of the most frequent theory items in our corpus (full list available online),
which indicate that these items are heavily referenced in many different
articles and also with a rather high density within individual articles.
As the ranking of the top-ten document frequencies (df) by type count (see
Table 2) shows, hermeneutic references (df=126) are particularly dominant,
which is probably due to the wide semantic range of hermeneutics.
According to Joris van Zundert, hermeneutics “turned from a theory of
the interpretation of text into an ontological theory of understanding. It
can now be understood broadly as the theory of the processes that turn
information into knowledge” (333). As humanities are implicitly indicated
as being hermeneutic, DH is also often located within a hermeneutical
tradition. Moreover, DH is certainly deeply rooted in textual scholarship and
philology. This could also explain the dominance of linguistic theory (df=87).

6 For a complete frequency list see the “Supplementary Table” spreadsheet (1st tab: frequencies dict_items) at https://theory-in-dh.github.io/

conceptual_forays/JoCA2022/conceptual_forays_supplementary.html

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

It is also noteworthy that close reading is one of the core methods of
“new criticism” (Ransom), which was “an early to mid-twentieth-century
literary movement that subordinated the historical […] concerns of previous
scholarship to the text itself” (Bode 92). Therefore, the high document
frequency of new critics (df=66) might point to theoretical endeavors framing
and conceptualizing close and distant reading. Alan Liu even argues that
DH—the catch-all term distant reading in particular—has disturbed the
truce between new criticism and cultural-critical readings post 1968: “An
unspoken demilitarized zone thus intervened between close and culturalcritical reading. The digital humanities break this détente.”
Against this background, the document frequency of critical theory (df=62)
can be further commented on. Our dictionary of cultural studies contains
critical theory as one type. Critical theory includes, in a broader sense,
many theoretical approaches, which “have emerged in connection with the
many social movements that identify varied dimensions of the domination of
human beings in modern societies” (Bohman). In a narrower sense, critical
theory designates the Frankfurt School. Within the theory debate, David M.
Berry and other scholars invoke critical theories to strengthen the role of
criticism within DH research (Berry 140; Burdick et al. 76).
With regard to Table 2, it is also noteworthy that while poststructuralism
is not mentioned explicitly as a theoretical framework, three of its most
popular representatives—Roland Barthes (df=78), Michel Foucault (df=59),
and Jacques Derrida (df=54)—have surprisingly high document frequencies.
We will discuss the role of poststructuralism in more detail in the section
on cooccurrence analysis, where we will encounter the names of these three
French philosophers once again.
As opposed to the single mentions of theory items that were discussed
previously, there are also terms that are referenced extensively within single
articles. In our corpus, the terms with the highest average token count in one
document are not umbrella terms, such as hermeneutics or poststructuralism,
7
but rather specific theorists (full list available online). Jacques Lacan
(dict_psychoanalysis) has an average token count per document of 11.6 and
appears in 16 different papers. Lacan is closely followed by Vladimir Propp
(dict_structuralism) with an average of 10.2 tokens per document and a
document frequency of 20. Frank Raymond Leavis (dict_formalism_new
criticism) is another example, as he is mentioned in a total of 8 papers with
an average token count of 6.6.

7 For a complete frequency list see the “Supplementary Table” spreadsheet (1st tab: frequencies dict_items) at https://theory-in-dh.github.io/

conceptual_forays/JoCA2022/conceptual_forays_supplementary.html

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Approaching these single articles via close reading reveals for Lacan that his
theoretical constructs are discussed under a computational paradigm. More
concretely, Terry Harpold deals with Lacan’s four discourses, while Tamise
van Pelt’s article refers to a Lacanian notion of subjectivity. The case for
Propp is a bit different. His formalistic approach seems highly adaptable
to the demand for discrete categories that are readable by the computer.
Journal articles referencing Propp are then concerned, for example, with the
reproducibility of text annotations as well as machine learning (Fisseni et al.;
Finlayson).
Leavis’s references mostly appear in the context of Charles P. Snow’s “two
cultures” dichotomy. It is worth highlighting that the Leavis references seem
to be intertwined with the narrative “bridging the gap” (Porsdam), which
plays an important role in defining an epistemic culture of DH. Leavis (and
Snow) are thus representatives of a larger humanities discourse, which is also
echoed in DH.

counting cooccurrences of dictionary terms
Having discussed the frequencies of single theory items, we will now outline
in more detail the results of our investigation into the relations between
those items by means of cooccurrence analysis of theory items (full list of
8
cooccurrences available online). These results (see Table 3) largely aligned
with the results of the previous frequency analysis (see Table 2), with
unexpected theory cooccurrences being rather rare. This might well be an
effect of our dictionaries, which are limited to cultural and literary theories
in a broader sense. We also did not use any significance weights like Pointwise
Mutual Information at this point. Rather, this evaluation is intended to
explore frequent patterns in the texts and to serve as a first plausibility check.
The highest ranks are again taken by renowned poststructuralists, namely
Foucault, Barthes, and Derrida. As might be expected, cultural studies and
hermeneutics frequently cooccur with these poststructuralist representatives.
The pairing of Barthes and Foucault appears in a total of 18 journal articles,
9 of which are dedicated to the broader topic of authorship theories. Another
explanation may be that cooccurrences of Foucault and Derrida (as well as
Barthes) could be traced back to text encoding initiatives, which shaped, in
particular, early DH projects. Schreibman points out that critics
saw the possibilities afforded by HTML as the realisation of
theories by Barthes, Foucault, Bakhtin and Derrida who wrote
of textual openness, nonlinearity and intertextuality […].

8 For a complete list of cooccurrences see the “Supplementary Table” spreadsheet (2nd tab: cooccurrences) at https://theory-in-dh.github.io/

conceptual_forays/JoCA2022/conceptual_forays_supplementary.html

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Table 3. Overview of the ten-most-frequent dictionary term cooccurrences.
cooccurrence count

type_1

type_2

18

roland barthes (dict_poststructuralism)

michel foucault
(dict_poststructuralism)

18

jacques derrida
(dict_poststructuralism)

michel foucault

15

roland barthes

jacques derrida

14

cultural studies

critical theory
(dict_cultural studies)

13

roland barthes

hermeneutics

13

cultural studies

hermeneutics

13

critical theory

michel foucault

12

jacques derrida

critical theory

12

hermeneutics

critical theory

10

roland barthes

poststructuralism

For row 1, a cooccurrence count of 18 means that Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault cooccurred—each at least one time—in 18 different
documents.

Indeed, many first-generation electronic editions conceived in
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) were viewed by their
creators as embodiments of post-structuralist theory (285).
In this regard, “hypertext” also appears in over half of the mentions of
Derrida and Foucault (10 of 18 cooccurrences), while George P. Landow,
who adapted Barthes’ ideas for his hypertext theory, is mentioned in these
contexts, too.
A close reading of these passages suggests that poststructuralist approaches
in DH are mostly being used to underpin aspects of modeling and textual
representation. This anecdotal close read demonstrates how the shared uses
of our previously defined dictionary items can be utilized to identify possible
patterns and qualitatively evaluate them in more detail. The example shown
here only highlights the theoretical embeddedness of a particular topic;
however, with expanded term lists, more such forays would be possible to
explain theory usage in DH publications.

conclusions
Our semasiological investigations have revealed how usage, functions, and
semantics of theory are interfering in DH research. The ranking of the
document frequencies by type count provides a rather expected result of
theory within DH. Hermeneutics, cultural studies (critical theory), and new
criticism are frequently brought up as theoretical frameworks considering
our dictionaries. What our case study indicates is that the empirical basis
of the “end of theory”-narrative in DH is weak, insofar as there are diverse
significant references to canonical authors in the tradition of theory in the
humanities. This continuity of theoretical reflection might be worth telling,
because it is contrary to the idea of a disruptive break in DH’s knowledge

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

production. Jean Bauer has already stated in 2010 that “I am sick and tired of
people saying that my friends, my colleagues, and I do not understand or care
about theory. Every digital humanities project I have ever worked on or heard
about is steeped in theoretical implications AND THEIR CREATORS
KNOW IT” (Bauer’s emphasis). Moreover, it is noteworthy that our case
study hints at an uneventfulness of theory in DH. This leads us to suspect
that the narrative of “theorylessness” must play a different role for DH’s
epistemic cultures. M. Beatrice Fazi explains that “the prospect of the end of
theory is also reflected in popular concerns about the end of cognitive work
due to algorithmic automation, and in related worries about the shrinking of
human intellectual faculties in a society where rational decision is increasingly
delegated to machines” (107).
The single mentions of theory items as well as its cooccurrences give further
insights into the different ways theory is used within DH research. We
also conducted some scalable readings by oscillating between quantitative
explorations and context-sensitive references in the respective articles. While
referencing Lacan, for example, seems to go hand in hand with reflecting
on philosophical ideas such as subjectivity for DH’s specific issues, Leavis
and Snow (“two culture”-dichotomy) show that DH’s theories are located
within a larger story of theory in sciences. Propp’s formalistic approach,
however, serves more as a demonstrative example of “theory in practice.”
Cooccurrences can be interpreted in a similar vein. Theoretical references
are made here in order to weave them into practices, tools, and (digital)
representations. Although this operationalization of theory has been recently
subjected to criticism (Alvarado), it is nevertheless reasonable to assume that
theory references are thus linked to a certain expectation; namely, to address
humanities claims under a computational paradigm. Future consideration
could be given to systematically expanding the dictionaries. In particular,
theories from media studies, linguistics, sociology, and computer science
should be included.

3.2. Semantic spaces of theory and related concepts (case study 2)
In our second case study, we explored the semantic spaces of theory and
related concepts, utilizing state-of-the-art neural embedding models (Wevers
and Koolen 232). We were thus less concerned with the scope, function, and
usage of specific theory frameworks, and instead focused on theory itself. The
focus therefore shifts to an onomasiological investigation, complementing the
semasiological approach in the previous case study. The guiding questions
of this second case study are: What other terms have similar contexts like
theory? Which terms are used “instead of” or “complementary” to theory in
the same or similar contexts? When comparing semantic contexts between
related terms or counter concepts, what similarities and differences emerge?

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

theory embeddings
One conceptual foundation of this case study can be found in the idea of
distributional semantics. The distributional hypothesis suggests that words
with similar distributions of context—that is, similar surrounding
words—have similar meanings (Harris). For example, lion and tiger have
other context words (e.g., teeth and claws) in common than car and bus (e.g.,
wheels and street). Word embeddings model such cooccurrences of words
as vector representations in a multidimensional space, which then can be
compared to each other using similarity metrics, such as the cosine distance
(Mikolov et al.). We followed existing approaches which assume that semantic
representations and their stability can be represented by means of word
embeddings and that these embeddings can be compared between diachronic
time periods in corpora (Martinc et al.; Giulianelli et al.; Kahmann et al.;
Hamilton et al.; Jatowt and Duh).
As a first step, we fine-tuned a pre-trained BERT language model for domain
adaptation on our DH journal corpus. Following the approach outlined by
Matej Martinc et al., we did not conduct any diachronic fine-tuning. Since
embeddings in the BERT language model are contextual, which means they
are dependent on the time-specific context, we used this as our input to access
the diachronic semantic stability. We used the English BERT-base-uncased
model with 12 attention layers and a hidden layer size of 768. Much like
Mario Giulianelli et al. and Martinc et al., we created sequences of byte-pair
encoding tokens.
For each of these sequences, we generated a sequence embedding by summing
the last four encoder output layers. The resulting sequence embedding
represents a concatenation of contextual embeddings for the tokens in the
input sequence. We sliced those concatenations and acquired a representation
(i.e., a contextual token embedding) for each word usage in our journal
articles. These representations differ depending on the context in which
the token is embedded. As a consequence, the same word has a different
representation in each context. Finally, we could aggregate the embeddings on
the token level and were able to compare different time spans in the corpus
with regard to the semantic representation of the theory-related vocabulary
in our study.
In a first experiment, we extracted different word usage contexts of theory via
its local embeddings, hoping to reveal different senses of theory. A k-means
clustering approach was chosen to explore different embeddings in the texts
(see Figure 3). We used a silhouette analysis to identify the optimal number
of clusters (k), which in this case appears to be 6 clusters. Interestingly, the
clusters mostly reflect different forms of syntactic embeddings of the word
form theory, for instance “in theory,” “theory of,” “noun + theory,” and the
plural form “theories,” as well as a cluster with concrete instances of theories
and a cluster with rather conceptual aspects of theory.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Figure 3. K-means clustering of the embeddings with k = 6.

The mere clustering of the local embeddings of the word theory is obviously
limited in its expressive power regarding the role of theory in DH, however,
as this simple approach does not reveal distinct senses and usage patterns
of theory as a concept. We therefore also took a diachronic perspective on
theory, aggregating the concept’s local embeddings for different time slices. To
gain better insights into different senses of theory, we also chose to analyze
semantically related concepts, to see how those relate to theory in the course
of time.

comparison of theory and other dh concepts through
time
Because we sought to examine relations of theory to contextual word
embeddings of further concepts that play a role in DH’s epistemic cultures,
we took a closer look at model, method, experiment, and tool, as they seem
essential for characterizing DH research and are frequently encountered in
corresponding discourses. Above all, we were interested not only in semantic
ambiguity but also in questions of controversiality and indispensability of
theory. Modeling, for instance, is described as a core DH activity (Flanders
and Jannidis, Knowledge Organization and Data Modeling in the

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Table 4. Top-10 highest-ranked terms for theory, model, method, tool, and experiment.
Rank

theory

model

method

tool

experiment

1

ideology

framework

technique

instrument

trial

2

theorization

representation

procedure

technique

test

3

principle

theory

approach

method

laboratory

4

hypothesis

approach

algorithm

resource

investigation

5

doctrine

prototype

strategy

implement

exercise

6

methodology

paradigms

tool

software

simulation

7

idea

simulator

tactic

facility

research

8

philosophy

idealization

mode

platform

observation

9

conceptualization

conceptualization

mechanism

device

study

10

paradigms

system

process

weapon

project

The ranking is based on cosine similarities, which is mostly between 0.6 and 0.7 for the above terms.

Humanities). At the same time, DH research is considered to expand the
methodological repertoire of the humanities by using tools and other
infrastructural settings. Finally, the term experiment will be discussed against
the background of the emerging DH laboratories (Pawlicka-Deger).
To provide an overview of the basic contexts of the epistemic concepts theory,
model, method, tool, and experiment, Table 4 shows the top-10 terms that have
the most similar embedding vectors. We will revisit Table 4 in the following
discussion on the relationship between these five concepts. Figure 4 provides
an overview of how the concepts tool, model, experiment, and method evolve
with regard to their semantic similarity to theory. Following the suggestions of
Shen Dinghan et al. and Vitalii Zhelezniak et al., we used max pooling of the
contextualized embeddings of each term within a 3-year slice, as it typically
takes out the influence of syntactical embedding information.
Interestingly, theory is almost a straight line, as its self-similarity is rather
high, even from the beginning of the period surveyed. As time goes by, some
more nuanced contexts are added to the theory vector. The vectors of the
other concepts are stacked for every 3-year-slice, which means as time goes
by, more contextual meaning is also added to the other vectors. The graph
also shows that the ranking of similar concepts is stable over time, meaning
model is always the concept that is most similar to theory, then comes method,
experiment, and, finally, tool, which has fairly low numbers in the beginning.
As Figure 4 shows, we initially observe a gradual increase of contextual
meaning of theory, while from the 1990s on, contextual meanings of theory
became established. As with model, between the 1966 and 1990, an increase
of contextual meanings can be observed, but this quickly levels off. According
to our experimental design, it seems worth mentioning that theory and model
were neither used synonymously nor did they gradually diverge. Rather,
both concepts converged quite soon to their final contextual meaning. Fotis
Jannidis and Julia Flanders mention that within DH research views on formal
modeling among others are advocated which “tend […] to focus on how
Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Figure 4. Overview of different concepts and their accumulated cosine similarity to the theory vector through time.
The cosine similarity is based on max-pooling of the contextualized embeddings of each term within a 3-year slice.

the concept of the ‘model’ is itself embedded in more general concepts like
theory and how they, theories and models determine or at least interact with
the formal model” (28). Comparing both context vectors may broaden the
perspective of how model and theory are related.
As Table 4 shows, different semantic fields of theory and model can be
described over the entire period covered by our corpus. The terms principle,
hypothesis, doctrine, and paradigm indicate that theory rather covers contexts
of regularity as well as (axiomatic) programmatic and forms of intersubjective
knowledge, while model has more contextual similarity with terms such as
representation, prototype, and simulation, which focus on different kinds of
mapping as well as formal systematizations. This could be one reason why
theory and model have the same contextual distance to each other (see Figure
4): they consistently seem to cover different semantic fields. It could be
assumed that these two semantic fields might complement each other. Thus,
in the top-10 ranking of terms with the most similar context words as model,
theory takes the third highest rank. This is not so with model, which does not
appear in the top-10 ranking of theory at all.
These semantic frictions between theory and model seem to represent the
ambiguity of these concepts within DH research. Neither the concepts nor
their semantic fields can be transferred—rather, they intertwine. In
Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

comparison, the relation between theory and method seems to be more
explicit. Not only do they cover distinguishable semantic fields, as Table 4
clearly shows, but the top terms of methods include technique, procedure,
approach, and strategy, while the distance of the context-vectors remains
constant (see Figure 4).
A slightly different picture emerged when we compared the semantic contexts
of theory and experiment (see Figure 4). While the vector for experiment
seems to have been established in the first six years, it then slowly converges
to theory, adding further meanings. The top-10 highest-ranked terms for
experiment, however, point to an (oppositional) semantic field; namely, the
more practical side of DH research. Moreover, the highest ranking terms for
experiment seem to break into two semantic fields: 1) terms such as trial,
test, laboratory, investigation, and observation suggest contexts that could be
associated with empirical science research settings. The fact that the first place
is occupied by trial is particularly noteworthy, as it introduces notions of
failure within DH research. 2) The terms research, study, and project seem to
bring into sharper relief ongoing transformations in DH in general. Strictly
speaking, the most similar context to research and project has the term
experiment with regard to our five selected terms. According to Ian Hacking,
experiments are not subordinate to theory; rather, “experimentation has a life
of its own” (Hacking 150). With regard to the decoupling of experiment and
theory building, Willard McCarty concludes that for DH,
we can infer that humanities computing likewise need not
wait on the emergence of a theoretical framework, that its
semidirected, semicoherent activities are no discredit, rather the
norm for an experimental field. Furthermore, we may find deep
kinship in the complex, constructivist idea that, to put the
matter crudely, scientific knowledge is both found and made
(1133).
Interestingly, however, the semantic similarity between theory and experiment
does not change within our corpus (see Figure 4). Thus, no meanings
are added that would further distance the two concepts. This situation is
somewhat different for the concept tool. Between 1966 and 1985 the tool
vector fluctuated in its movement as it drew closer and moved further
away from the theory vector. From the mid-1980s on, there is a steady
approximation. It could be hypothesized that one reason for this constant
convergence of these two vectors might be the emerging idea of a theorydriven development of tools.

change of nearest neighbors
Next, we took a closer look at the theory vector and how it changed its
contexts over time. We created a matrix that contains all the ranks for all
the other terms for each of the 3-year-slices (full list of ranks over time

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Figure 5. Overview of the top-25 global best-ranked terms and their accumulated cosine similarity to the theory vector
through time.
We used a threshold of the top-25 ranks, that means anything below that threshold is not visualized in the plot. The
cosine similarity is based on max-pooling of the contextualized embeddings of each term within a 3-year slice.
9

available online). For the purpose of a more consistent comparison that is
not distorted by grammatical or syntactic effects, we compared theory only to
other nouns.
Figure 5 provides an overview of the top-25 terms that are best ranked by
means of their cosine similarity to the concept theory throughout the entire
corpus. As some of these concepts have quite some fluctuations in their ranks
through time, it is impossible to visualize the whole spectrum of ranks for
multiple terms in one plot. Therefore, we decided to only visualize the rank
movement within the first 25 ranks. Theorist, for example, steadily increases
its ranks (1969–1972: rank 1,030 → 1981–1983: rank 472 → 2002–2004:
rank 49), but it is only in the time slice of 2011 to 2013 that it hits the top
25 ranks and thus appears in the graph.

9 For a complete list of ranks over time see the “Supplementary Table” spreadsheet (3rd tab: ranks over time) at https://theory-in-

dh.github.io/conceptual_forays/JoCA2022/conceptual_forays_supplementary.html

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Strikingly, the terms principle, idea, and concept have the most similar context
vectors to theory, indicating a rather fundamental and conceptual use of
theory in the context of DH research articles. These terms are closely followed
by the term model, reaffirming the observations about the rather stable and
semantically distinct relation between theory and model that were already
described for Figure 4. Interestingly, technology and methodology only
appear in the top-20 most-similar terms in the early 1990s. It could be argued
that technology’s appearance in the top 20 is related to the dissemination
of large and searchable (textual) databases, and more generally to the advent
of the World Wide Web and its manifold technological inventions and
implications. This seems to be somehow related to the need for a
methodology, in other words a more abstract reflection, systematization, and
theorization of methods.
While methodology seems to co-evolve with technology, method on the
other hand remains rather stable and rather close to theory throughout time.
Surprisingly, Underwood characterizes the 1990s as the period where theory
building was missed (70). At the same time, the 1990s seem to play a crucial
role in DH’s epistemic culture, as the periodization approach introduced by
Todd Presner and Jeffrey Schnapp, who suggest two main waves of DH,
also starts precisely here. The first wave, from the mid-1990s to the early
2000s, focuses “on large-scale digitization projects and the establishment of
technological infrastructure.” The second wave, which entails the period
from the early 2000s until 2010, is “deeply generative, creating the
environments and tools for producing, curating, and interacting with
knowledge that is ‘born digital’ and lives in various digital contexts.” While
this periodization has been criticized by some, we can definitely add to this
debate with our observation that significant semantic shifts can be observed
during this period (Berry 4). As technology and methodology gain new
meanings, they also become more similar to the contextual embeddings of
theory.

conclusions
Our second case study presents an onomasiological investigation of theory
within DH research. A key insight from the comparison of theory and related
epistemic concepts shows that most acquired their full contextual meaning
early, in the first five years of our corpus. Afterwards, the concepts remained
rather stable, in terms of their self-similarity on the one hand, and their
similarity to the concept of theory on the other. A further investigation of the
epistemological role of tools in DH is very much needed.
Another interesting insight comes from the comparison of the two contextual
embeddings of theory and model. It became apparent that model comes closer
to contexts of representation. Moreover, the relation of (opposite) terms to
theory such as experiment and tool was found to be rather stable and expected.
To put it simply, our contextual embeddings stories are more predictable
Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

and less eventful than the often polarized (research) discourse might convey.
Looking at the time component of theory references, it is striking that the
mid-1990s was a point when new (conceptual) stories began to contextually
interfere with each other or were forgotten (Underwood). Further research
approaches could therefore focus more on periodization issues.

4. Final remarks
In this paper we investigated narratives of theory through a computational
conceptual history approach. The fundamental assumption was that a
conceptual study of theory can shed light on research discourses and
knowledge structures in DH’s epistemic cultures. Our investigation was
founded on the premise that our conceptual history approach can be regarded
as a first foray into the field of a DH-specific history of science. Therefore,
our semasiological and onomasiological studies aimed to provide a
comprehensive picture of theory within DH research. We understand theory
as one central concept of DH research, which is semantically ambiguous
but also highly indispensable. In our article, we have therefore presented
two possible storylines of theory that we encountered in our conceptual
forays. Our first storyline (case study 1) was about the range, frequencies,
and functions of the concept of theory in DH research articles. Our second
storyline (case study 2) was about the contextual embeddings of theory and
related concepts that are central to an epistemology of DH.
Our conceptual stories of theory emerged within the context of our specific
experimental setting, which is obviously limited and biased by our specific
corpus of DH journals as well as by our specific selection of dictionaries
and methods. We want to highlight that we do not claim to have identified
and sufficiently discussed central theoretical narratives in DH. Rather, we
have presented a methodology that is inspired by current approaches to
computational conceptual history, allowing us to make various forays into
the development of the concept theory. This article is to be understood as
an invitation to follow our approach and to contribute further storylines in
order to draw a bigger, more complete picture of the role, function, and
development of theory in DH over time.
Data Repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/DKPKGD
Submitted: June 20, 2022 EDT, Accepted: June 30, 2022 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

works cited
Alvarado, Rafael C. “Digital Humanities and the Great Project: Why We Should Operationalize
Everything and Study Those Who Are Doing so Now.” Debates in the Digital Humanities 2019,
edited by Matthew K. Gold et al., University of Minnesota Press, 2019, pp. 75–82,
https://doi.org/10.5749/j.ctvg251hk.9.
Anderson, Chris. “The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method Obsolete.”
Wired, 23 June 2008, http://www.wired.com/2008/06/pb-theory/.
Arnold, Eckhart. “Positivistischer Methodenfetischismus als Anathema der digitalen
Geisteswissenschaften.” DHd 2018 Kritik der digitalen Vernunft. Book of Abstracts, Feb. 2018,
https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.4622295.
Baroni, Raphaël. “Tellability.” The Living Handbook of Narratology, 2019, https://wwwarchiv.fdm.uni-hamburg.de/lhn/node/30.html.
Bauer, Jean. “Who You Calling Untheoretical?” Journal of Digital Humanities, vol. 1, no. 1, 2011.
Berry, David M. “Introduction: Understanding the Digital Humanities.” Understanding Digital
Humanities, edited by David M. Berry, Palgrave Macmillan, 2012, pp. 1–20, https://doi.org/
10.1057/9780230371934_1.
Berry, David M., and Anders Fagerjord. Digital Humanities: Knowledge and Critique in a Digital
Age. Polity Press, 2017.
Betti, Arianna, and Hein van den Berg. “Modelling the History of Ideas.” British Journal for the
History of Philosophy, vol. 22, no. 4, July 2014, pp. 812–35, https://doi.org/10.1080/
09608788.2014.949217.
Bode, Katherine. “The Equivalence of ‘Close’ and ‘Distant’ Reading; Or, Toward a New Object for
Data-Rich Literary History.” Modern Language Quarterly, vol. 78, no. 1, Mar. 2017, pp.
77–106, https://doi.org/10.1215/00267929-3699787.
Bohman, James. “Critical Theory.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by Edward N.
Zalta, 2021, http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2021/entries/critical-theory.
Brandt, Christina. “Wissenschaft.” Erzählen: Ein interdisziplinäres Handbuch, edited by Matías
Martínez, Metzler, 2017, pp. 211–18.
Burckhardt, Daniel, et al. “Distant Reading in der Zeitgeschichte. Möglichkeiten und Grenzen einer
computergestützten Historischen Semantik am Beispiel der DDR-Presse.” Zeithistorische
Forschungen/Studies in Contemporary History, vol. 16, no. 1, 2019, pp. 177–96, https://doi.org/
10.14765/ZZF.DOK-1345.
Burdick, Anne, et al., editor. Digital Humanities. Paperback, MIT Press, 2012.
Cameron, Deborah, and Don Kulick. Language and Sexuality. Cambridge University Press, 2003,
https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511791178.
Castle, Gregory. “The Blackwell Guide to Literary Theory.” Blackwell Guides to Literature,
Blackwell, 2007.
Cecire, Natalia. “Introduction: Theory and the Virtues of Digital Humanities.” Journal of Digital
Humanities, vol. 1, no. 1, 2011.
Chatman, Seymour. Coming to Terms. The Rhetoric of Narrative in Fiction and Film. Cornell
University Press, 1990.
Clarin-D. DiaCollo Tool. 2016, https://www.clarin-d.net/de/kollokationsanalyse-in-diachronerperspektive.
De Bolla, Peter, et al. “Distributional Concept Analysis.” Contributions to the History of Concepts,
vol. 14, no. 1, June 2019, pp. 66–92, https://doi.org/10.3167/choc.2019.140104.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

D’Ignazio, Catherine, and Lauren F. Klein. Data Feminism. The MIT Press, 2020, https://doi.org/
10.7551/mitpress/11805.001.0001.
Drucker, Johanna. “Humanistic Theory and Digital Scholarship.” Debates in the Digital
Humanities, edited by Matthew K. Gold, University of Minnesota Press, 2012, pp. 85–95,
https://doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/9780816677948.003.0011.
El Khatib, Randa, et al. “Prototyping Across the Disciplines.” Digital Studies/Le champ numérique,
vol. 8, no. 1, 2019, pp. 1–10, https://doi.org/10.16995/dscn.282.
Elliott, Jane, and Derek Attridge. “Introduction: Theory’s Nine Lives.” Theory after Theory, edited
by Jane Elliott and Derek Attridge, Routledge, 2011, pp. 1–17.
Endres, Bill. “A Literacy of Building: Making in the Digital Humanities.” Making Things and
Drawing Boundaries, edited by Jentery Sayers, University of Minnesota Press, 2018, pp. 44–54,
https://doi.org/10.5749/j.ctt1pwt6wq.7.
Fazi, M. Beatrice. “The Ends of Media Theory.” Media Theory, vol. 1, no. 1, 2017, pp. 107–21.
Finlayson, Mark A. “ProppLearner: Deeply Annotating a Corpus of Russian Folktales to Enable the
Machine Learning of a Russian Formalist Theory.” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, vol. 32,
no. 2, 2017, pp. 284–300.
Fisseni, Bernhard, et al. “Annotating with Propp’sMorphology of the Folktale: Reproducibility and
Trainability.” Literary and Linguistic Computing, vol. 29, no. 4, Oct. 2014, pp. 488–510,
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqu050.
Flanders, Julia, and Fotis Jannidis. Knowledge Organization and Data Modeling in the Humanities.
1 Jan. 2015.
---, editors. The Shape of Data in the Digital Humanities: Modeling Texts and Text-Based Resources.
Routledge, 2019.
Friedrich, Alexander, and Chris Biemann. “Digitale Begriffsgeschichte? Methodologische
Überlegungen Und Exemplarische Versuche Am Beispiel Moderner Netzsemantik.” Forum
Interdisziplinäre Begriffsgeschichte, vol. 5, no. 2, 2017, pp. 78–96.
Giulianelli, Mario, et al. “Analysing Lexical Semantic Change with Contextualised Word
Representations.” Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, edited by Dan Jurafsky et al., Association for Computational Linguistics, pp.
3960–73.
Gold, Matthew K. “The Digital Humanities Moment.” Debates in the Digital Humanities, edited
by Matthew K. Gold, University of Minnesota Press, 2012.
Gutiérrez de la Torre, Silvia E., et al. “The Many Faces of Theories in DH Journals: Toward a
Dictionary of Theoreticians Mentioned in DH.” Proceedings Digital Humanities Conference
Tokyo, 2022, pp. 215–17, https://dh2022.dhii.asia/dh2022bookofabsts.pdf.
Haase, Christian, et al. “SCoT: Sense Clustering over Time: A Tool for the Analysis of Lexical
Change.” Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, EACL, 2021, pp. 198–204.
Hacking, Ian. Representing and Intervening: Introductory Topics in the Philosophy of Natural Science.
Cambridge University Press, 1983, https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511814563.
Hall, Gary. “Has Critical Theory Run Out of Time for Data-Driven Scholarship?” Debates in the
Digital Humanities, edited by Matthew K. Gold, University of Minnesota Press, 2012, pp.
127–32, https://doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/9780816677948.003.0015.
Hamilton, William L., et al. “Diachronic Word Embeddings Reveal Statistical Laws of Semantic
Change.” Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), vol. 1, 2016, pp. 1489–501, https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/p16-1141.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Harpold, Terry. “The Underside of the Digital Field.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 6, no. 2,
2012, http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000141/000141.html.
Harré, Rom. “Some Narrative Conventions of Scientific Discourse.” Narrative in Culture: The Uses
of Storytelling in the Sciences, Philosophy, and Literature, edited by Christopher Nash, Routledge,
1990, pp. 81–101.
Harris, Zellig S. “Distributional Structure.” Word, vol. 10, no. 2–3, Aug. 1954, pp. 146–62,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00437956.1954.11659520.
Hess, Carla W., et al. “The Type-Token Ratio and Vocabulary Performance.” Psychological Reports,
vol. 55, no. 1, Aug. 1984, pp. 51–57, https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1984.55.1.51.
Jannidis, Fotis, and Julia Flanders. “A Gentle Introduction to Data Modeling.” The Shape of Data
in the Digital Humanities: Modeling Texts and Text-Based Resources, edited by Julia Flanders and
Fotis Jannidis, Routledge, 2019, pp. 26–95.
Jatowt, Adam, and Kevin Duh. “A Framework for Analyzing Semantic Change of Words Across
Time.” Proceedings of the 14th ACMIEEE-CS Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, 9/8/2014 - 9/
12/2014, London, United Kingdom, 2014 IEEE/ACM Joint Conference on Digital Libraries
(JCDL), edited by George Buchanan, IEEE Press, 2014, pp. 229–38, https://doi.org/10.1109/
jcdl.2014.6970173.
Jockers, Matthew L. Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois
Press, 2013, https://doi.org/10.5406/illinois/9780252037528.001.0001.
Kahmann, Christian, et al. “Detecting and Assessing Contextual Change in Diachronic Text
Documents Using Context Volatility.” Proceedings of the 9th International Joint Conference on
Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management, 2017,
https://doi.org/10.5220/0006574001350143.
Kleymann, Rabea. “Softwareprototyp: Zur Theoriemündigkeit Experimenteller Software in Den
Digital Humanities.” Wovon sprechen wir, wenn wir von Digitalisierung sprechen? Gehalte und
Revisionen zentraler Begriffe des Digitalen, edited by Martin Huber et al., 1st ed., CompaRe,
2020, pp. 119–38.
Knorr Cetina, Karin. Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge. Harvard University
Press, 1999, https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674039681.
Kollmeier, Kathrin. “Begriffsgeschichte und Historische Semantik.” Docupedia-Zeitgeschichte, 2012,
https://doi.org/10.14765/ZZF.DOK.2.257.V2.
Koselleck, Reinhart. The Practice of Conceptual History: Timing History, Spacing Concepts.
Translated by Todd Samuel Presner, Stanford University Press, 2002, https://doi.org/10.1515/
9781503619104.
Koselleck, Reinhart, and Michaela Richter. “Basic Concepts in History: A Historical Dictionary of
Political and Social Language in Germany.” Contributions to the History of Concepts, vol. 6, no. 1,
Jan. 2011, pp. 1–37, https://doi.org/10.3167/choc.2011.060102.
Landow, George P. Hypertext: The Convergence of Contemporary Critical Theory and Technology. 2.
print, Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1992.
Latour, Bruno, and Steve Woolgar. Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts. Princeton
University Press, 2013, https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt32bbxc.
Liu, Alan. “Where Is Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities?” Debates in the Digital
Humanities, edited by Matthew K. Gold, University of Minnesota Press, 2012, pp. 490–510,
https://doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/9780816677948.003.0049.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Luhmann, Jan, and Manuel Burghardt. “Digital Humanities—A Discipline in Its Own Right? An
Analysis of the Role and Position of Digital Humanities in the Academic Landscape.” Journal of
the Association for Information Science and Technology, vol. 73, no. 2, June 2021, pp. 148–71,
https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.24533.
---. “Same Same, but Different ? On the Relation of Information Science and the Digital
Humanities A Scientometric Comparison of Academic Journals Using LDA and Hierarchical
Clustering.” Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium of Information Science
(ISI2021):“Information between Data and Knowledge – Information Science and Its Neighbors
from Data Science to Digital Humanities, edited by Christian Wolff and Thomas Schmidt,
Regensburg, 2021, pp. 173–99, https://doi.org/10.5283/EPUB.44944.
Lyotard, Jean-François. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Repr. Manchester Univ.
Press, 1986.
Malazita, James W., et al. “Digital Humanities as Epistemic Cultures: How DH Labs Make
Knowledge, Objects, and Subjects.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 14, no. 3, 2020, http://
www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000465/000465.html.
Martinc, Matej, et al. “Leveraging Contextual Embeddings for Detecting Diachronic Semantic
Shift.” arXiv, Mar. 2020, http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01072.
McCarty, Willard. “Humanities Computing.” Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science,
2003, pp. 1124–35.
Michel, Jean-Baptiste, et al. “Quantitative Analysis of Culture Using Millions of Digitized Books.”
Science, vol. 331, no. 6014, Jan. 2011, pp. 176–82, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1199644.
Mikolov, Tomas, et al. “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and Their
Compositionality.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 2013, pp. 3111–19,
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1310.4546.
Moretti, Franco. Distant Reading. Verso, 2013.
Müller, Ernst, and Falko Schmieder. Begriffsgeschichte und Historische Semantik: Ein kritisches
Kompendium. Suhrkamp, 2016.
---. “Begriffsgeschichte und Wissenschaftsgeschichte.” Geschichte und Gesellschaft, vol. 44, no. 1,
Mar. 2018, pp. 79–106, https://doi.org/10.13109/gege.2018.44.1.79.
---. Begriffsgeschichte: Zur Einführung. Junius, 2020.
Pawlicka-Deger, Urszula. “The Laboratory Turn: Exploring Discourses, Landscapes, and Models of
Humanities Labs.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 14, no. 3, 2020, http://
www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/14/3/000466/000466.html.
Plotnitsky, Arkady. “Science and Narrative.” Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory, edited by
David Herman et al., Routledge, 2005, pp. 514–18.
Porsdam, Helle. “Digital Humanities: On Finding the Proper Balance Between Qualitative and
Quantitative Ways of Doing Research in the Humanities.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 7,
no. 3, 2013, http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/7/3/000167/000167.html.
Presner, Todd. Digital Humanities 2.0: A Report on Knowledge. 19 Apr. 2010, https://cnx.org/
contents/iqMKXpSE@1.4:J0K7N3xH@6/Digital-Humanities-2-0-A-Report-on-Knowledge.
Presner, Todd, and Jeffrey Schnapp. Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0. 2009, http://
humanitiesblast.com/publications/.
Ramsay, Stephen, and Geoffrey Rockwell. “Developing Things: Notes Toward an Epistemology of
Building in the Digital Humanities.” Debates in the Digital Humanities, edited by Matthew K.
Gold, University of Minnesota Press, 2012, pp. 75–84, https://doi.org/10.5749/minnesota/
9780816677948.003.0010.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Ransom, John Crowe. “Criticism, Inc.” The Virginia Quarterly Review, vol. 13, no. 4, 1937, pp.
586–602.
Risam, Roopika. New Digital Worlds: Postcolonial Digital Humanities in Theory, Praxis, and
Pedagogy. Northwestern University Press, 2019, https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv7tq4hg.
Rivkin, Julie, and Michael Ryan, editors. Literary Theory: An Anthology, 2nd ed., Blackwell
Publication, 2007.
Rockwell, Geoffrey, et al. “The Trace of Theory: Extracting Subsets from Large Collections.”
Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts, Jagiellonian University & Pedagogical University,
2016, pp. 85–92, https://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/139.
Ryan, Marie-Laure, et al. “Narrative.” Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory, edited by David
Herman, Routledge, 2005, pp. 344–48.
Schreibman, Susan. “Computer-Mediated Texts and Textuality: Theory and Practice.” Computers
and the Humanities, vol. 36, no. 3, 2002, pp. 283–93, https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1016178200469.
Schwandt, Silke. “Digitale Methoden für die Historische Semantik: Auf den Spuren von Begriffen
in digitalen Korpora.” Geschichte und Gesellschaft, vol. 44, no. 1, Mar. 2018, pp. 107–34,
https://doi.org/10.13109/gege.2018.44.1.107.
Selden, Raman, et al. A Reader’s Guide to Contemporary Literary Theory. 5th ed., Pearson
Longman, 2006.
Shen, Dinghan, et al. Baseline Needs More Love: On Simple Word-Embedding-Based Models and
Associated Pooling Mechanisms. arXiv, 2018, https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09843.
Sinclair, Stéfan, and Geoffrey Rockwell. Voyant Tools, 2016, https://voyant-tools.org/.
Sula, Chris Alen, and Heather V. Hill. “The Early History of Digital Humanities: An Analysis of
Computers and the Humanities (1966–2004) and Literary and Linguistic Computing
(1986–2004).” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, vol. 34, no. 1, Nov. 2019, pp. 190–206,
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqz072.
Terras, Melissa, et al, editor. Defining Digital Humanities: A Reader. Taylor & Francis, 2013.
Thelwall, Mike, et al. “Academic LGBTQ+ Terminology 1900-2021: Increasing Variety, Increasing
Inclusivity?” Journal of Homosexuality, 2022, pp. 1–25, https://doi.org/10.1080/
00918369.2022.2070446.
Underwood, Ted. “Theorizing Research Practices We Forgot to Theorize Twenty Years Ago.”
Representations, vol. 127, no. 1, 2014, pp. 64–72, https://doi.org/10.1525/rep.2014.127.1.64.
van Pelt, Tamise. “The Question Concerning Theory: Humanism, Subjectivity, and Computing.”
Computers and the Humanities, vol. 36, no. 3, 2002, pp. 307–18, https://doi.org/10.1023/
a:1016160114582.
van Vree, Frank, et al., editor. History of Concepts: Comparative Perspectives, Amsterdam University
Press, 2010.
van Zundert, Joris J. “Screwmeneutics and Hermenumericals: The Computationality of
Hermeneutics.” A New Companion to Digital Humanities, edited by John Unsworth et al., John
Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2016, pp. 331–47.
Vogelsang, Kai. “Conceptual History: A Short Introduction.” Oriens Extremus, vol. 51, 2012, pp.
9–24.
Warwick, Claire. “Building Theories or Theories of Building? A Tension at the Heart of Digital
Humanities.” A New Companion to Digital Humanities, edited by John Unsworth et al., John
Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2016, pp. 538–52.
Weingart, Scott, et al. The Index of Digital Humanities Conferences. Carnegie Mellon University,
2020, https://doi.org/10.34666/k1de-j489.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

29

Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals

Wevers, Melvin, and Marijn Koolen. “Digital Begriffsgeschichte: Tracing Semantic Change Using
Word Embeddings.” Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History,
vol. 53, no. 4, May 2020, pp. 226–43, https://doi.org/10.1080/01615440.2020.1760157.
Zhelezniak, Vitalii, et al. Don’t Settle for Average, Go for the Max: Fuzzy Sets and Max-Pooled Word
Vectors. arXiv, 2019, https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.13264.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

30

