Furiasse, Amanda. “Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in
African and Diasporic Futurism.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 7, no. 4, Jan. 2023,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.55508.

ARTICLE

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African
and Diasporic Futurism
Amanda Furiasse1
1 Nova Southeastern University

Keywords: DH theory, historical archives, digital art
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.55508

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 7, Issue 4, 2022

Digitization has commonly been marketed as a predictive technology that can
enable humanity to intercede into the future. This faith in digital media’s
prophetic powers, however, obfuscates the fact that digitization is unavoidably
stuck in the past. In effect, digitization transforms the past into highly mutable
and volatile data sets that are persistently rewritten by computer’s memory
refresh circuits. While some lament this temporal incongruity as problematic to
the archival process, African and diasporic futurist artists are utilizing digital
distortion as an opportunity to emplace the archival process within the sea and
reimagine the archive as an impermanent, transitory, and fluid practice that has
the capacity to usher in a more culturally and scientifically nuanced
understanding of memory. This article explores the capacity of the sea to
reorientate digital humanities scholarship around the cyclical interplay between
machinic, environmental, and human social systems and craft historiographical
methods around envisioning a viable future for humanity.

Introduction
In Nnedi Okorafor’s debut novel Lagoon, digital media crash lands into Earth
where it quickly finds its alien home in a murky lagoon off the coast of Lagos,
Nigeria. Okorafor’s literary metaphor might seem odd when considering that
digital media runs on electricity, yet the metaphor of sea vividly captures
digital media’s watery futures (Okorafor). Submerging scholars in an
unfamiliar, alien world where the materiality of texts and objects are
fundamentally transformed into ephemeral moments in time that are
routinely pulled back by the tide and mixed with new itemsets and clusters
to be reborn as fragile new hybridities, digital media does not store the past.
Rather, it fundamentally transforms the past into what can only be described
as terrifying monsters that slither back beneath the interface’s murky waters
as quickly as they surface on our screens.
Okorafor’s metaphor of sea exemplifies a growing scholarly and artistic
movement within digital humanities to relocate digital media’s origins from
the US military’s static and uncompromising command structure to the
strange and otherworldly undercurrents of humanity’s watery futures. In
particular, digital futurist artists Geraldo Oliveira, Alex Chivir-Ter Tsegba,
and Jean-Pierre Marchant demonstrate how scholarship can approach digital

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

media’s volatility as an opportunity to immerse archival material into a
contested sea of memory where humanity can regenerate otherworldly visions
of humanity’s futures. Reimagining the story of digitization from the
perspective of the sea offers a renewed narrative framework for digital
humanities scholarship that effectively grapples with digitization’s inherent
volatility while simultaneously drawing attention to digital media’s complex
and dynamic relationship to the environment.

Regenerating the Archive
On September 23, 1949, US President Truman’s announcement of an atomic
explosion in the Soviet Union shocked Americans. Until the invention of
atomic weapons, Americans tended to have an unrelenting faith in the ability
of the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans to protect them from military threats.
Growing fear over the potential for Soviet nuclear weapons to fly undetected
across the Bering Strait quickly shattered Americans’ faith in the sea’s cloak
of military invisibility.
To thwart this watery threat, the military launched the United State’s first air
defense system, the Semi-Automatic Ground Environment, or SAGE. The
idea was fairly simple in that it consisted of a large and expansive network
of radar that detected incoming missiles flying across the Bering Strait and
transmitted that information back to a centralized direction center. SAGE
transformed the United States into what Paul Edwards has described as an
“air-defense bubble” (Edwards 104).
Central to the project’s completion was the development of a fundamental
concept in computing, memory. Rather than use storage tubes, SAGE used
hard magnetic material as transformer cores to store bits of information.
Electric current pulses sent in some of the wires through a core allowing the
direction of the magnetization in that core to be set in either direction, thus
storing a one or a zero.
Magnetic core-memory was a watershed development in the history of
computing, since it dramatically improved the efficiency and speed in which
data could be stored and would become the first step toward RAM memory.
Prior to the development, the storage process was unreliable and subject
to variation. Magnetic core-memory seemed to provide no limitations in its
capacity, eliminating the problem of state decay and the consequent need for
refreshing (Edwards 102). In fact, they were able to hold their states even after
the computer was powered off.
Although SAGE dramatically improved the efficiency of computation, the
system was quickly usurped by a far more powerful alternative. The invention
of the transistor-based semiconductor memory and the integrated silicon
RAM chips of today’s computers were faster, smaller, lighter, and more
economical than their magnetic precursors. A memory refresh circuit
periodically rewrites the data and restores the capacitors to their original
Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

charge to offset the leaks on the capacitors attached to the electrical charge.
In effect, semiconductor memory sacrifices the permanence, stability, and
reliability of the US military’s magnetic core memory for speed and efficiency.
The decision to sacrifice stability and reliability for speed was one that
foreshadowed digital computation’s watery futures. First introduced by John
Vincent Atanasoff, the idea of regenerative memory was initially used to
describe the processes by which non-static devices could hold their values
because their signals degenerated overtime, such as Williams tubes, the
predecessor to the magnetic core (Mackintosh 90–92). Atanasoff did not
initially use the phrase “regenerative memory” to describe this process.
Instead, he used the concept of “jogging one’s memory” to describe the way
in which the charge needed to be restored in a capacitor so that it would
not decay to 0 or negative (92). Atanasoff thus imagined the capacitor as
functioning in much the same way as the biological processes inherent in
nature.
Semiconductor memory’s apt similarities to human memory’s inherently
volatility are crucially important, since they reveal digital media’s inherent
volatility and unpredictability. Semiconductor memory supplanted the US
military’s promise of stability with a volatility that fundamentally dismantled
the military’s assurances of magnetic core memory’s impenetrable safeguards.
What emerged from the watery threats across the Bering Strait was neither
static nor safe but a highly mutable and volatile instrument that remained
impervious to human control.
Rather than issue warnings about semiconductor memory’s inherent
volatility, digital technology companies instead marketed digitization as a
stable and reliable tool that could save physical materials threatened by
material decay. By the early 2000s, Google was rapidly becoming an early
evangelizer of digitization’s seemingly limitless storage capacity and played a
formative role in shaping early expectations and assumptions about digital
media’s capabilities. Google’s evangelization efforts tended to converge
around what many believed to be the ultimate source of material decay in
society: the archive.
In 2004, Google promoted an ambitious program that aimed to save the
archive from material decay, called the Partner Program, but announced
publicly as “Google Books.” The program involved a collaboration with
publishers whereby Google actively worked to persuade publishers to scan
their books and deposit their scanned texts into their centralized digital
database. Google promoted the program as free marketing and advertising,
since it would allow users to sample a portion of the book (Thompson).
Unbeknownst to publishers at the time, Google was also working on a
more covert project called “The Library Project” that attempted to digitize
university archives. The University of Michigan was among the first

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

universities to agree to digitize its entire collection of more than seven million
books. Stanford soon followed behind Michigan and agreed to initially
digitize two million books with the stated aim to soon expand the program.
Each library received a digital copy of the scanned book deposited into
Google’s database in return for their participation in the program. Google,
conversely retained the scanned copy in its search index (Harpur 135–37).
While Google stressed that the program was intended for research and
preservation of the globe’s most valuable resources and ensured the longevity
of existing archives, some publishers contested the project as an infringement
of copyright. The debate eventually progressed into a lawsuit between Google
and the Author’s Guild and the Association of American Publishers (AAP).
In 2011, the US District Court for the Southern District of New York
rejected the proposed settlement between the AAP and Google, arguing that
Google’s process of digitization was inherently “transformative.” The Judge
found that “Google’s use of copyright works is highly transformative” in that
“Google digitizes books and transforms expressive text into a comprehensive
word index that helps readers, scholars, researchers, and others find books”
(Healey). Furthermore, the Judge claimed “Google Books has transformed
book text into data for purposes of substantive research including data
mining and text mining in new areas.”
From the perspective of the US District Court, Google was not merely
storing nor extending the lifespan and accessibility of text-based archives, but
they were creating something entirely new. The Court’s astute recognition
of digital media’s unique capacity to transform text-based media exposes a
central problem at the heart of digitization. The computer does not merely
‘store’ texts or images, but it refreshes the past through a volatile process of
degeneration and regeneration.
Describing this central distinction, media theorist Wolfgang Ernst argues
that digitization fundamentally shifts the priority of traditional archives
from storage to transmission and access (Ernst 194). In the past, traditional
archives used metonymic linguistic ordering to categorize information into
discrete names, dates, and categories. These discrete categories in turn allowed
historians to construct links between the materials in an attempt to create
unified and cohesive narrative representations of the past. By contrast,
computation reframes and reorganizes uploaded materials into itemsets and
association rules, clusters and clusterings, and decision trees that ultimately
aim to find similarities and patterns between certain identifying
characteristics.
In the case of images, Wolfgang Ernst explains that digitization is not
interested in establishing authorship. Rather the expressed goal is to establish
an objective means of describing and identifying pictorial similarities,
including color, motif, form, etc. As Ernst describes, “Since the comparison

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

of images here is of a simple overlay kind, and points of similarity and
difference are recorded during the process of comparison, the central criterion
is a simple matching process - a visual equivalent of the well known word
search that is a standard feature of every word-processing and database
computer software” (118).
In effect, when an image is uploaded into a digital database, it is transformed
into a set of quantifiable elements that fundamentally change and distort the
image to fit within its frames of reference. Moreover, digital media cannot
‘store’ these materials, but it can only temporarily suspend its refresh cycle
to display the uploaded sounds and images on screen temporarily. It is for
this reason that Ernst describes digitization as “time-based media,” since
digitization fossilizes time or transforms time into a series of discrete sounds
and images that can only be momentarily suspended on screen.
Building upon Ernst’s insights, media theorist Wendy Chun warns that
digitization “transforms processes in time into texts and discrete artifacts in
space” (Chun, Programmed 19). The key behind this transformative process
is source code. As Chun explains, “Source code as technê, as a generalized
writing, is spectral. It is neither dead repetition nor living speech; nor is it a
machine that erases the difference between the two. It, rather, puts in place a
relation between life and death, between present and representation, between
two apparatuses” (25). Source code effectively transforms alphanumeric text
into a set of moving images and sounds that make it appear as though source
code’s alphanumeric text has come to life before the user.
Although source code might be written in the past, it is projected out at the
user as present action. Chun describes this effect as a form of “sourcery,”
since it conceals from the user the very obvious fact that source code is not
the singular power that animates their screen. According to Chun, “The
information traveling through computers is not 1s and 0s, beneath binary
digits and logic lies a messy, noisy world of signals and interference” (139).
The interface conceals the messy interpretive process from the human user
who is tricked into believing that source code is an animating force. Without
the ability to see the messy interpretive process behind the black screen, the
user is left with a powerful illusion.
Digitization then is not just time-based media, but it is time-based media that
fundamentally disrupts our perceptions of time. In contrast to the traditional
archive, digitization inverts time, reframing the past as an enduring present.
The clear distinction between our ‘stored’ past and the elusive present is
blurred before the user who only sees and hears what appears as ‘living’
animated sounds and images. Ernst calls this effect “archival phantasms,”
since digital databases neither extend nor remap the archive. Rather, they are
an “ideological deflection of the sudden erasure of archives (both hard-and
soft-ware) in the digital world” (Ernst 119).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

This erasure, in turn, induces a certain forgetfulness or uncertainty, since
digital media will not always regenerate everything that it persistently erases.
Computation’s growing ability to amass more data is marketed as increasing
certainty, yet it does the exact reverse and induces a false sense of security
(Thylstrup et al. 1–5). Even the Internet Wayback Machine or
web.archive.org which is commonly called the “library of the Internet,”
cannot store or preserve webpages but only regenerates links on webpages,
many of which are broken, since webpages can only link to images and those
link locations are always changing. The IVM is a zombie graveyard in that the
pages being ‘backed up’ are merely empty corpses of what once was, neither
dead nor alive, linking to addresses that no longer exist.
Submerging the traditional archive within a murky lagoon of persistently
changing currents, digitization poses a significant challenge to historians.
If the task of the historian is to preserve and tell the stories of the past,
digital media’s teams of bots, servers, electrical currents present a central
obstacle. In effect, digitization’s inability to store materials means that it
cannot point to the future. For example, you put an object into storage,
because you anticipate that you will need it in the future. Whereas storage
is primarily focused on the future, memory, by contrast, points back to
the past and requires repetition, due to its transient nature. As Chun aptly
describes, “Memory contains within it the act of repetition: it is an act of
commemoration—a process of recollecting or remembering” (133).
While digital media might be commonly marketed as immutable storage, it
is in fact as mutable as human memory. Yet, the power of sourcery obscures
this from the human user who believes that source code has the ability to
manifest visions of the future on screen. The common marketing of digital
media as ushering in the future obscures and mystifies the fact that digital
technologies only function by redirecting humanity back to the past. A tweet,
for example, is already the past once tweeted. Twitter might organize this past
into “trends” in an effort to reframe them as pointing toward some imagined
future, but those trends in fact point back to a certain past. Digital media,
as Chun notes, merely ‘updates to remain the same’ and thus cannot offer
anything new but persistently attempt to reframe the past in different ways
to present the illusion of newness (Chun, Updating 3).
Digital technologies might be sold as storage, but they are simultaneously
and paradoxically pointed to the past. This paradoxical tension is nowhere
more apparent than with the growing threat of bugs. Because source code
functions around the ability of programmers to predict how computers
will interpret their instructions in an imagined future, bugs or unexpected
circumstances remain a persistent problem for computation. Computers
routinely interpret instructions in ways in which programmers cannot foresee
or predict. Bugs thus reveal the fundamental inability on the part of human
programmers to control computation.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

Computer scientist Joseph Weizenbaum describes the problem that bugs pose
to computation as animating from two opposing and irreconcilable facts
which a programmer must reconcile with: “First, he knows that he can make
the computer do anything he wants it to do; and second, the computer
constantly displays undeniable evidence of his failures to him. It reproaches
him. There is no escaping this bind. The engineer can resign himself to the
truth that there are some things he doesn’t know. But the programmer moves
in a world entirely of his own making. The computer challenges his power,
not his knowledge” (Weizenbaum 115).
Building upon Weizenbaum’s insight, bugs frustrate digitization’s conflation
of storage with memory, exposing the inherent transience, fragility, and
unreliability behind digitization. Whereas the task of the historian was once
to stitch together archival documents that sat passively and safely on storage
shelves, bugs reveal how those archival documents are not only alive but
incredibly volatile. It is as though digitization has submerged the archive
within an alien world where the once passive and safe archival documents
have been transformed by digitization’s sourcery into temperamental sea
creatures.
This alien world, however, is not entirely unfamiliar to historians. In much
the same way as digital media had a tendency to conflate storage and memory,
the invention of photography fundamentally transformed the assumed
distinction between storage and memory. Exploring photography’s influence
on human understandings of time, religion scholar Molly McGarry describes
the processes by which photography’s presents seemingly irrefutable and
immutable representations of the past (McGarry). Like digital media before
it, the photograph was assumed to be transparent, immune to human
manipulation, since it was assumed to be under the exclusive purview of an
objective machine. The camera was intended to outlast and outperform the
body’s inherent mutability and fragility, offering humans the possibility of
release from their vulnerability to time’s unrelenting degeneration.
Although photography might have been represented as immutable,
photography was in fact an act of sorcery. In effect, photography created a
temporal inversion of sorts whereby the screen of the camera transformed
time itself into tangible visions that were in turn projected back out at the
viewer as if they were visions of their future. Through the manipulation
of light, the camera created a haunting mimesis of the past that could
stretch indefinitely into the future. Looking at a photograph of a civil war
battlefield, for example, continues to transform contemporary Americans’
attitudes about war. It brings the civil war into the future with vivid detail
and seemingly irrefutable historical accuracy.
In much the same way as digital media confuses the delineation between
storage and memory, photography creates what McGarry describes as ‘ghosts
of futures past,’ since photographs are neither memories nor storage but
Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

create ghostly specters of the past that haunt the future (McGarry 2).
According to McGarry, 19th century Spiritualists actively utilized
photography’s sorcery and purposely used photographic distortion
techniques, often called “spirit photography,” to create haunting specters of
the dead that hovered over the living.
While humans might have been mortal, Spiritualists astutely recognized that
the camera offered humanity the opportunity to create spirit doubles that
could live on into the future. As McGarry explains, Spiritualists were not
naive about the camera’s distortive abilities but were in fact astutely aware
that the camera’s promise of immortality for humanity was bound up with
a fundamental act of distortion. Rather than refute photography’s distortion
of the past, they instead embraced it as an opportunity to create new, creative
representations of the past that actively and consciously attempted to reach
into and shape the future.
McGarry’s exploration of 19th century Spiritualism offers important insight
for digital humanities scholarship today. In particular, digital media and
photography function in much the same way in that they both confuse
and distort the distinction between memory and storage. In the case of
photography, this fundamental distortion of the past heralded an era of
sorcery where the distortive powers of photography were actively harnessed by
Spiritualists as a medium to reach into the future and create a unique image
that would speak to and inspire future generations. Like photography before
it, digitization also has the potential to herald a renewed age of machinic
sorcery. Rather than reject digital media’s volatility, is it perhaps time for
digital humanities scholars to embrace a sorcery of their own?

Sailing on Encrypted Seas
When it comes to digital sorcery, there is perhaps no better place to look
than the work of African and diasporic futurist artists. African and Diasporic
Futurism are diverse global movements with a variety of different
manifestations but can be loosely defined as movements aimed at creating
dynamic visions of the future that challenge eurocentric narratives of the past
(Yaszek). From Afrofuturism to Black Quantum Futurism, Astro-Blackness,
and Diasporic Futurism, futurist artists tend to draw upon ritual ideas
and practices from African and indigenous cultures, merging them with
new technologies and scientific innovations to usher in visions of a future
where African, indigenous, and diasporic communities play an active role
in creating and ushering into being. As Africana studies scholar Reynaldo
Anderson explains, black futurists are “reclaiming the right to tell their
own stories but also critique the European/American digerati class of their
narrative about cultural others, past, present, and future, and challenging
their presumed authority to be the sole interpreters of Black lives and Black
futures” (Anderson 228).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

Figure 1. Geraldo Oliveria “Humanum Est”, (2020).

A crucial component of this effort to reclaim the right to tell their own
stories involves the digital repurposing of archival materials and texts that
were historically used to represent the lives and experiences of African and
diasporic communities. In futurist art, the archive is not dismissed or
disregarded as an important artistic resource. Rather, the archive figures
prominently in futurist art where it routinely serves as the primary resource
for creative materials.
The recent work of Brazilian digital artist Geraldo Oliveria offers unique
insight into the processes by which futurist artists creatively repurpose
archival materials. In “Humanum Est,” Oliveria takes an archival photograph
of two African men and fundamentally transforms it with digital distortion
techniques (Figure 1). The distortion technique enables Oliveria to create an
entirely new landscape behind the two men.
This new landscape projects the two African men into outer space. The sun,
planet Jupiter, and a large white lotus flower encircle the men. The distortion
makes the men appear as though they are a space shuttle, preparing to take
flight and travel across the cosmos to the planet Jupiter. The compilation of
these different images imbues the image with a SciFi feel and cosmic reference
point while simultaneously drawing on African imagery, cultural customs,
and traditions.
Although the original image was rooted in a particular political and historical
context, the digital repurposing of the image emplaces them within a cosmic
and universal framework that remains rooted in the past while simultaneously
pointing to an interplanetary future. In Space-Time Collapse I: From the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

Congo to the Carolinas, art historian Rasheedah Phillips argues that such
creative acts in futurist art attempt to embrace African notions of time as
relational and experiential. As Phillips explains, “In many indigenous African
cultures and spiritual traditions, time can be created, is independent of
events, is not real until experienced, and is often intimately connected to
genealogical, astrological, and ecological cycles ecology” (20).
Building upon this insight, political scholar John Ayoade has argued that
Yorùbán ritual approaches time as a product or compilation of events. From
the perspective of Yorùbán ritual, “Time devoid of events makes little sense”
(Ayoade 99).Challenging time’s presumed universality, Yorùbá society
understands time as not just a subjective experience but a communal one
that emerges from a community’s unique experience of it within the world.
Moreover, nature is not just impacted by time, but it is events within nature,
such as the changing of the seasons, that determine time.
This focus on nature’s impacts on time, according to philosopher Fayemi
Ademola Kazeem, manifests not just a cyclical understanding of time but
one with a celestial-cosmic focus: “Environmentally, time is measured either
through celestial-cosmic cycle, the terrestrial-ecological cycle or both” (31).
Yorùbá society balances the terrestrial-ecological, such as the life cycles of a
human being, with the celestial cycles of the moon to produce a multifaceted
understanding of time that emplaces the terrestrial-ecological story of
humanity into a larger cosmic frame.
This astronomical or cosmic framework, in turn, challenges linear notions of
time. As political theorist Bukola Oyeniyi argues, Yorùbá society understands
cosmic and terrestrial events to be intimately interwoven together: “In the
Yorùbá world, events have not only a relation to the past and the present
but also to the future” (Oyeniyi 9). The future could thus be described
as pulling the past toward it. From the perspective of Africana religions,
understanding the past requires a keen understanding of the future, since the
future necessitates the past just as much as the past determines the future.
According to Phillips, this explicit repudiation of time’s presumed linearity
is commonly reflected within African futurist art where the primary goal
is to “dismantle the clockwork universe” (Phillips 15). Western mechanical
conventions of time or the Western consciousness of time as fixed events
moving forward along a forward-looking mechanical timeline promotes the
notion of a progressive future in which the past is inaccessible. By contrast,
African futurist movements embrace the cosmic or astronomical frameworks
of time in Africana religions where the past is determined by the future. As
Phillips explains, “Once the future event is experienced, it instantaneously
moves backward into the present and past dimensions” (22). It is only by
experiencing the future that one can access the past.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

In addition to drawing upon Africana ritual, African futurism’s unique
understanding of time simultaneously draws upon the innovations and
discoveries in the field of quantum physics, such as fluidity and dynamism.
In quantum physics, the notion of time’s mutability and subjectivity is
particularly influential in futurist artwork where time is depicted as mutable
as human memory. As Carlo Rovelli explains in The Order of Time, western
mechanical conventions about time are fundamentally flawed and do not
adequately capture time’s volatility: “The fact that we cannot arrange the
universe like a single orderly sequence of times does not mean nothing
changes. It means that changes are not arranged in a single orderly succession:
the temporal structure of the world is more complex than a simple single
linear succession of instants” (Rovelli 10).
Building upon this insight, Rovelli explains how Boltzmann’s theory about
the arrow of time is commonly misunderstood and wrongly used as evidence
of time’s directionality. According to Rovelli, Boltzmann argued that humans
attributed particularity or order to certain characteristics of matter, because
they lacked the ability to see material reality in all its microscopic detail. The
idea of time’s direction forward was thus born from our inability to bear
witness to molecules’ microscopic variables. As Rovelli writes, “This is the
disconcerting conclusion that emerges from Boltzmann’s work: the difference
between the past and the future refers only to our own blurred vision of the
world” (33).
Rovelli, however, cautions that this does not make a perceived order to time
entirely illusory and nonexistent, but our subjective experiences with time are
what make time real: “It is a local and complex one that is not amenable to
being described in terms of a single global order” (113–14). Time might be
mutable, but it’s mutability is what makes it real.
African futurism’s amenability to quantum physics’ dynamic and fluid
understanding of time makes the movement uniquely suited to grapple with
the temporal effects of digital technologies. Digital media does not abide by
linear conventions but exists within a temporal configuration that collapses
the assumed binary between past and future. The sorcery of source code
takes the past and projects it back out at the user as if it were a vision of
an imagined future to come. We wait in eager anticipation of the computer’s
processing of our commands with our necks strained and backs hunched in
tense anticipation for the computer to respond to our cursor clicks.
This process is made possible by the conflation of storage and memory,
since conflating the two effectively hides the complex and messy social and
machinic relations that are constantly transforming our clicks and keyboard
strokes into moving sounds and visions in an anticipated future. In many
ways, digitization reveals the secrets behind time’s illusory directionality. The
screen distorts or blurs the details from the user who consequently assumes
that it is the future that they see before them.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

In Oliveria’s digital image, this digital sorcery is exemplified in the image’s
paradoxical temporal framework. Situated in both the past and future, the
image’s unique temporal configuration allows Oliveria to visually capture the
collapsing of temporal binaries. In the process, Oliveria’s artwork reframes
the two men at the image’s center as eternal, because of their relationship
to the artist who not only sees himself in them but also is astutely aware
of those in the future who see themselves in his art. As Oliveria explains, “I
bring in my art the aesthetics of Afrofuturism where I rescue my ancestry and
reverence black culture, using historical photographs of African peoples and
black personalities, adding contemporary influences. The idea is to imagine
future black people, alive, strong and unique” (Jepchumba).
The manipulation of historical photographs of African peoples does not
necessarily distort history, but it reorganizes history around human
relationships to actualize its promise of offering revelatory knowledge of the
future. Building upon this insight, Phillips explains that African futurism
tends to represent the future as multidirectional, since “time depends on the
quality of the event and the person experiencing it” (22). The past is not
inaccessible to the future, but one can only travel to the past by experiencing
the future. Past and future are thus unfolding simultaneously with the two
bound together by intergenerational connections.
Oliveria’s reframing of the image repairs the traditional archive’s damage
to his relational connection to his ancestors. According to historian Camae
Ayewa, the founding moment of modernity was the fracturing of African
conceptions of time and imposition of colonial mechanical conventions onto
African communities with the seizure of Africans from their homes, families,
and communities and forcible trafficking across the sea (Ayewa 9). The
trauma of this rupture would in turn be preserved in the traditional archive
with historical photographs of Africans rooting them in a particular
geopolitical context and denying them the universalizing cosmic frameworks
that their ritual traditions demanded.
Digital technologies’ conflation of storage and memory is here embraced by
Oliveria as an opportunity to challenge colonial conventions of time and
repair his relational connections to past and future generations. By purposely
using digital distortion techniques to change the image’s background,
Oliveria is able to restore his relational connections and project the two men
into a cosmic or astronomical temporal frame. As Oliveria explains of his
artwork on social media, “I don’t want to be modern, but I want to be
eternal” (Oliveria).
African futurist artist Alexis Chivir-Ter Tsegba embraces a similar temporal
perspective within her work and uses digital technologies as a mechanism
to create digital collages that transform mundane photographs of daily life
into explorations of the otherworldly. In “Generation,” Tsegba manipulates
a digital photo of a group of African women pounding rice and purposely
Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

Figure 2. Alexis Chivir-Ter Tsegba “Generation”, (2018).

manipulates the background, enwrapping the women in gold stars and golden
mushrooms (Figure 2). She also infuses the mortar with a golden ray
emanating from within it.
The digital distortion of the image makes the women appear as though they
are standing atop the stars and thus creates a cosmic and otherworldly feel. It
is as though the image is actively inducing a psychedelic vision or trance-like
state in the viewer. Inducing a trance-like state in the viewer, in turn, enables
Tsegba to infuse the seemingly mundane image with sacred undertones.
Tsegba’s focus on the mundane activity of pounding rice also reframes
housekeeping, a duty and responsibility primarily associated with women,
into a sacred, otherworldly act that sustains and ferments relational
connections between past and future generations. The three women’s
participation in this gendered activity makes them appear as though they
are eternal. The act of pounding rice is consequently transformed from a
mundane, everyday activity to a medium for divine revelation between past
and future generations.
“Generation” reflects Tsegba’s larger concern with gender’s impact on our
understanding of time. In other art pieces, Tsegba explores this theme at
length, using digital distortion techniques to invoke visual connections
between women’s reproductive experiences and cyclical notions of time. As
gender theorists Ben Davies and Jana Funke explain, the idea of time’s
linearity or mechanical notions of time’s progression forward tends to
privilege men’s reproductive experiences of the world. In contrast to men’s
reproductive experience, menstruation plays out cyclically while resisting
Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

a linear progression of time and sharing a complex, albeit controversial,
relationship to the 29.5 day moon cycle (Davies and Funke). Moreover,
Davies and Funke explain that after menopause, a woman’s body is ‘queered’
in that she can engage in sex without consequence or reproductive futurity
and consequently poses a serious challenge to the progressive vision of time
as bound around an unrelenting reproductive futurity.
In “Generation,” Tsegba uses digital manipulation to reframe the three
women within a gendered framework of eternal cyclicality. The key to this
temporal subversion of linear time is the cosmic background that is digitally
inserted into the photograph. The insertion of this cosmic background binds
women’s participation around the simple and mundane performance of
pounding and preparing rice to be consumed, allowing past generations to
sustain themselves and bring into being the future. Although the traditional
archive might dismiss such an image as a mundane and inconsequential daily
life activity, Tsegba transforms the image into an encounter with the sacred
whereby past and future collapse inward on each other.
Through the application of digital manipulation techniques to the
photograph, Tsegba demonstrates how simple and routine embodied actions
create the very temporal framework that holds together the universe. Yet, it
is only in the past that the future can be encountered and made manifest.
Tsegba has not manipulated nor distorted the past, but she has seized upon
digital technologies’ conflation of storage and memory as an opportunity
to restore a notion of time rooted in African women’s unique subjective
experiences of it.
Likewise, diasporic futurist artist Jean-Pierre Marchant uses digital
manipulation of historical video footage to emphasize the subjective nature
of time. The primary source of his films are archival footage and his personal
home movies of his family and friends. Contrasting archival footage with
home videos, Marchant is able to reveal inconsistencies and gaps in official
archival footage and the archival record of an event. “A Life on the
Borderlands,” for example, tells the story of his father’s immigration from
South America to Canada (Figure 3). In this short film, he interlaces official
government documents that document his father’s immigration with home
videos and his own personal memories of his father.
At various points in this video narrative, his father’s official immigration
documents challenge his personal memories of his father. In the case of
his father’s education, for example, government documents claim that his
father had over ten years of schooling and education. Marchant, however,
remembers that his father in reality had very little to no schooling. Archival
documents are exposed as inconsistent with his own memories of his father.
Moreover, the official collective memory of his father, as preserved in
government archives, opposes his own personal memories of his father.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

Figure 3. Jean-Pierre Marchant (2020).

At points in the film, Marchant also wonders if his memories of his father
are as flawed as official archival documents. His film critically interrogates
whether he misinterpreted his father’s life and legacy. The interlacing of home
videos and official archival images distorts his father’s legacy to the point
that the viewer is as confused as the film’s creator as to who his father really
was. The distortion transforms his father into an otherworldly being who
enchants and haunts the past while simultaneously directing Marchant to
his own future. The central purpose of his film is not to better understand
his father but to confuse and distort his father’s legacy to the point that
his father becomes as unknowable and inaccessible as a God-like figure. His
father haunts Marchant’s memory, simultaneously pulling Marchant forward
to the future and back to the past.
Like Oliveria and Tsegba, Marchant embraces digital manipulation as an
opportunity to challenge the archive’s progressive linear narrative and distort
the archive’s objectivity by interlacing the archive with his personal memories
of his father. Digital distortion presents Marchant with a tool to tell his
father’s story from his own unique perspective as a diasporic individual. The
“borderlands” referred to in the film’s title refers to the temporal experience
of diasporic communities who feel as though they do not exist in either the
past or the future.
At one point near the film’s conclusion, Marchant wonders if the future is
in fact informing the past, since his own children are redirecting him back
to the past and thus reversing the perceived arrow of causality between past
and future. Are his children in the future in fact pulling him back to his

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

past? Marchant’s concluding question is deeply reminiscent of Oliveria and
Tsgeba’s experiences of time as a deeply subjective experience, staked in the
ephemeral and fleeting relationships with past and future generations.
Rather than organize time into a discrete linear flow, Oliveria, Tsgeba, and
Marchant use digitization as a mechanism to confuse and distort time,
rendering it into a discrete set of events connected through ephemeral
relationships that render the past into a space of encounter with the
otherworldly. Ultimately, their work pulls viewers to the past via the future
in order to demonstrate how history only comes into being through our
relational connections with those who will come after us. Marchant’s
experience as a father to his children, for example, is the triggering event
that compels him to remember and think back on his own relationship to
his father. His relationship to his children in the future are shaping his own
understanding of his past.
African and diasporic futurist artists effectively reveal how digitization’s
volatility can usher in a distinctive understanding of time as fluid, cyclical,
and mutable. In all three cases, they present the past as ethereal, mutable,
and deeply entangled in the future’s otherworldly and cosmic potentiality.
From the perspective of African and diasporic futurism, the job of the
historian is not necessarily to tie historical documents and archival materials
together in a static linear narrative that points to an ever more progressive
and advanced future. Rather, the purpose of history is to intentionally
distort those supposed links and connections while questioning the assumed
causality informing progressive linear frameworks.
In effect, digital media has fundamentally transformed the archive into a
medium for revelation that shares very explicit connections to the cyclicity
of the natural world. Revelation here refers to digital media’s distortion of
materiality as an opportunity to reformulate historiography around nature’s
unique time cycles. Put simply, if digital media can only regenerate the past by
fundamentally changing it, then the digital archive reproduces itself in much
the same way as the natural world. Just as the Fall makes the Spring possible
with nature ushering in the future through the degeneration of its past, the
volatility of digital archives means that the central task of digital humanities
scholarship is ultimately one geared around understanding nature’s cyclicity.
Tsegba vividly captures this insight and elicits the connections between digital
media and nature’s cycles in her recent work titled, “Receiving Light.” In the
art piece, she purposely uses digital distortion to drown and immerse archival
material in the soft glow of the sea (Figure 4). The image of an African man
resting next to the sea is interlaced with an image of an African woman’s
body. The interlacing of the two images makes it appear as though the man is
seated on the stomach of an African woman’s body with a rainbow extending
from his head.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

Figure 4. Alexis Chivir-Ter Tsegba, “Receiving Light”, (2020).

Tsegba makes no attempt to hide the fact from the viewer that the sea is a
synthetic reproduction. It is not ‘real’ in that it was clearly produced from a
software program. Yet, the application of digital enhancement and editing to
the image makes the sea seem as though it is more alive. It is not passively
resting in the backdrop of the image, but Tsegba uses digital distortion to pull
the viewer’s eyes into the sea. Tiny golden lights across the image make the
sea appear as though it is electrified and pulsating with the very same energy
pulses as the digital device that allowed Tsegba to create the image.
Probing the connections between digital media, the sea, and the human body,
Tsegba illicites an important aspect of African futurist conceptions of nature
and technology. Rather than trace digital media to the land, African futurism
instead imagines digitization’s origins as residing in the sea. In particular,
digital media is commonly depicted alongside depictions of Mami Wata, a
West African sea deity. Mami Wata’s presence within futurist art is historically
significant, since she is closely associated with the experiences of African
communities forcibly captured and trafficked to the Americas via the slave
trade. Women slaves thrown overboard became associated with the mythology
of Mami Wata who were assumed to live under the sea with the goddess
(Samatar 176).
Mami Wata’s presence in futurist art likely recalls this history as well as the
sea’s capacity for the politics of cooperative adaptation. Marine ecologies are
constituted by habitats, populations, and interactions among interdependent
beings and the surrounding environment all working toward mutualistic
symbiosis. The sea’s adaptive politics and historical relationship to African
ritual and slavery provide an apt landscape for African futurism to explore
Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

how humanity and the nonhuman environment are working cooperatively
together to symbiotically merge with digital media. This understanding of
digital media as bound up with nature’s cyclicity challenges western
philosophies of technology that infer technology ferments human dominance
over nature. In contrast to this approach, African futurism’s effort to visualize
the connections between digital media and nature demonstrate how
digitization is increasingly making humanity more reliant and subject to the
sea’s spontaneous and unpredictable forces.
African futurism’s emphasis on the relationship between digital technologies
and the sea is not entirely unique, but watery metaphors have proliferated
in popular culture. In Technobiophilia: Nature and Cyberspace, Sue Thomas
explores why water metaphors are among the most powerful and popular
metaphors used to describe digital media. Nets, waves, surges, floods, and
surfing commonly proliferate as metaphors to describe digitization and its
effects. According to Thomas, while digital media might run on electricity,
marine ecologies offer one of the few ways to describe digital technologies’
complex and interlocking networks, with their networking abilities operating
in much the same way as water tributaries. As Thomas describes, “In my own
sense of cyberspace, fanned-out fresh water tributaries pass into the spreading
salty ocean beyond, then are sucked back in again by the tide along with
strange new materials which fertilize yet more novel processes and tenuous
hybridities, only some of which will fully develop”(54).
Perhaps more than any other watery metaphor, sea travel metaphors, such as
sailing and surfing, remain among the most popular ways to describe digital
media’s effects. The origin of the surfing metaphor remains shrouded in some
debate with scholars struggling to trace its exact point of origin. While some
argue that the metaphor can be traced back to public librarian Jean Armour
Polly who used the concept to describe the experience of using the internet,
others trace the metaphor to the artwork of futurist artist Tom Mandel who
used the concept of surfing to describe the internet at the Stanford Research
Institute International Business Intelligence Program (Thomas 55).
It is somewhat odd that this watery metaphor would quickly gain traction,
since the act of surfing could not be more different from the actual experience
of using digital media. In contrast to the surfer who traces a path across
dangerous and powerful ocean waves, someone using digital media remains
static and safely seated in their chair, gliding their fingertips across the
keyboard and mouse pad. How could the idea of surfing possibly describe the
seemingly static and immovable experience of using digital media?
The metaphor of surfing might seem odd, but it does in fact have the
unique ability to capture digital media’s influence over our temporal and
spatial perceptions. In much the same way as the surfer remains static on the
surfboard as they glide across the water, people remain seated in front of their
computers while gliding across cyberspace’s temporal and spatial landscapes.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

Building upon this insight, Thomas argues that Polynesian traditions
approached nautical navigation and sailing as a process whereby human
beings remained static with the sea traveling past them. As she explains,
“When Polynesian people speak of navigation they do not conceive of
themselves as moving objects traveling across the sea, but rather as static
objects which the sea travels past”(60).
Building upon Thomas’ insight, there is also a real danger to surfing the
internet just as there is a real danger to gliding over the sea. The internet
throws people into currents and flows where they may be overrun, hacked,
and/or influenced into engaging in dangerous or even deadly practices. Like
a sea on the verge of an impending storm, digital media is a contested
sea of memory where people battle to remember against RAM’s inevitable
degeneration while simultaneously facing the unrelenting currents of other
people’s memories that constantly threaten to erase, distort, or reinforce their
own memories of the past. Moreover, the metaphor of surfing or sailing aptly
captures the fact that humanity largely remains at the will of the non-human
environment.
When it comes to using digital media, humanity is not necessarily in control.
Using digital media necessitates that a person give up control to what is
essentially a non-human composite of aluminum and silicon. The metaphor
of digitization as a contested sea of memory where people attempt to surf
or sail across digital media’s dangerous currents offers an apt metaphor
to describe this complex exchange between machinic, environmental, and
human social systems.
The dangers that lurk behind digitization’s interface are all too real. Yet,
those dangers are not necessarily insurmountable. Rather they require a
unique approach that embraces digital media’s tumultuous currents as an
opportunity to reconnect humanity to the non-human environment.
This metaphor is an important one, since it offers a narrative framework
for digital humanities scholarship that can shift away from digitization as
storage and grapple with digital media’s unique volatility. Metaphors have the
unique ability to help us imagine and thereby create new worlds. As Thomas
explains, “And once a new metaphor has been created, its very existence
reconfigures the world as we know it” (5). As a contested sea of memory,
digitization ushers in a distinctive understanding of time that vividly captures
digital media’s sorcery.
While the US military might have heralded digitization as an impenetrable
storage device, African and diasporic futurist artwork demonstrates the
failures of that promise. Rather than store the past, digital databases pull
the past into its intersecting currents of itemsets and clusters where the past
is persistently remade and reborn into ghostly hybridities that degenerate as
quickly as they regenerate on our screen. Digitization’s inability to store the

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

past, however, is not necessarily a problem that needs solving. As African and
diasporic futurism reveals, digital media’s volatility can usher in a distinctive
understanding of time as a sea of memory where past and future are always
intersecting in digitization’s volatile currents and crosscurrents. It is here
in the murky waters of digitization that digital humanities scholarship can
embrace a sorcery of their own.

Conclusion
Approaching time through the prism of the sea at this geologic epoch where
the sea remains more endangered and imperiled than ever before inevitably
directs digital humanities scholarship to the future. Environmentals have
routinely warned the world about the Anthropocene, a geological age where
human activity exercises a dominant influence on the environment, and called
for new historiographical methods that engage and cope with environmental
loss while offering hopeful visions of a livable future that moves human
civilization into a more-environmentally centric direction (Ladino;
Nowviskie). Digitization’s transformation of the traditional archive might
present an opportunity to seize upon this call and build historiographical
methods around envisioning a future for humanity that remains informed by
the loss and tragedy of the Anthropocene while simultaneously offering hope
for the future epoch to come.
The beautiful and haunting images produced by African and diasporic
futurist artists like Tsegba, Marchant, and Oliveria are so compelling and
enthralling precisely because of their grounded and forward-looking
perspective. While themes of loss and despair saturate their landscapes, so
too do themes of hope, joy, and excitement for what lies before the past.
Futurism’s power is bound up in its ability to inspire and move people
from apathetic despair to a grounded sense of hope for the future. Just
as looking out at the vastness of the ocean can calm a person, so too can
digital humanities projects and research facilitate a metamorphosis in a person
that compels them to reimagine their possible futures. There is no reason
why digital humanities scholars cannot merge their methods with those of
futurist artists. As Guldi and Armitage have previously explained, “Alternative
futures became the purview of futurists and science-fiction writers only when
historians gave up the field” (30).
The key behind this merger of methods stems from the embrace of digital
media’s unpredictability and volatility. Digital media’s conflation of storage
with memory does not just confuse and distort the remnants of the past,
but it fundamentally transforms the past into ethereal visions of the future
that vanish from digitization’s watery interfaces as quickly as they surface on
the murky waters of our screens. Capturing the full scale of digital media’s
effects on society requires embracing a dynamic understanding of time that
can go beyond big data analytics and capture this otherworldly effect. Digital

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

distortion is not a problem for digital humanities scholarship, but it is a
crucially important resource that can enable scholars to usher in grounded
visions of livable futures for humanity.
It is in the murky waters of the lagoon where digital humanities scholarship
finds its definitive task. The liminal space where sea meets land is an apt
metaphor and one that exposes the fundamental incongruence between
storage and memory at the heart of digitization. Navigating through these
treacherous waters requires an acute understanding of the dangers and
opportunities that lurk beneath the interface’s blackscreen. As Nnedi
Okorafor warns in Lagoon, digital media can drag down unsuspecting human
victims into its murky abyss where it fundamentally transforms them into
monstrous and horrifying reflections of the people that they once were.
Likewise, digital humanities scholars can easily become lost in digitization’s
alien waters. Perhaps the only way for digital humanities scholarship to
navigate such dangers is to pitch a sail and chart a path across digitization’s
encrypted waters.
Submitted: June 21, 2022 EDT, Accepted: June 30, 2022 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

works cited
Anderson, Reynaldo. “Afrofuturism 2.0 & The Black Speculative Arts Movement.” Obsidian, vol.
42, no. 1/2, 2016, pp. 228–36.
Ayewa, Camae. “Sights and Sounds of the Passage.” Black Quantum Futurism: Theory and Practice,
edited by Rasheedah Phillips, Afrofuturist Affair/House of Future Sciences Books, 2015, pp.
9–13.
Ayoade, John. “Time in Yoruba Thought.” African Philosophy, edited by Richard Wright,
University Press of America, 1984, pp. 93–100.
Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong. Programmed Visions: Software and Memory. MIT Press, 2011,
https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/9780262015424.001.0001.
---. Updating to Remain the Same: Habitual New Media. MIT Press, 2017, https://doi.org/
10.7551/mitpress/10483.001.0001.
Davies, Ben, and Jana Funke, editors. Sex, Gender and Time in Fiction and Culture. Springer, 2011,
https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230307087.
Edwards, Paul N. The Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War America.
MIT Press, 1997, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/1871.001.0001.
Ernst, Wolfgang. Digital Memory and the Archive. University of Minnesota Press, 2013.
Guldi, Jo, and David Armitage. The History Manifesto. Cambridge University Press, 2014,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139923880.
Harpur, Paul. Discrimination, Copyright and Equality: Opening the e-Book for the Print-Disabled.
Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Healey, John. “A Big, Winning Day for Google Books in Court.” Los Angeles Times, 14 Nov. 2013,
https://www.latimes.com/opinion/opinion-la/la-ol-google-books-copyright-fairuse-20131114-story.html.
Jepchumba. “Colafro: Brazilian Digital Artist Geraldo Oliveira.” African Digital Art, 5 Oct. 2020,
https://www.africandigitalart.com/2020/10/05/colafro-brazilian-digital-artist-geraldo-oliveira/.
Kazeem, Fayemi Ademola. “Time in Yoruba Culture.” Al-Hikmat, vol. 36, no. 1, 2016, pp. 27–41.
Ladino, Jennifer K. “What Is Missing? An Affective Digital Environmental Humanities.” Resilience:
A Journal of the Environmental Humanities, vol. 5, no. 2, 2018, pp. 189–211, https://doi.org/
10.5250/resilience.5.2.0189.
Mackintosh, Allan R. “Dr. Atanasoff’s Computer.” Scientific American, vol. 259, no. 2, 1988, pp.
90–96, https://doi.org/10.1038/scientificamerican0888-90.
Marchant, Jean-Pierre. A Life on the Borderlands. Toronto Media Arts Centre, 2020.
McGarry, Molly. Ghosts of Futures Past: Spiritualism and the Cultural Politics of Nineteenth-Century
America. University of California Press, 2012.
Nowviskie, Bethany. “Digital Humanities in the Anthropocene.” Digital Scholarship in the
Humanities, vol. 30, no. suppl_1, 2015, pp. i4–15, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqv015.
Okorafor, Nnedi. Lagoon. Simon and Schuster, 2014.
Oyeniyi, B. A. “Reconstructing Conflicts and Incorporation in Pre 18th Century Yoruba Land: A
Research Agenda.” Afro Asian Journal of Social Sciences, vol. 1, no. 1, 2010.
Phillips, Rasheedah. Space Time Collapse I: From the Congos to the Carolinas. AfroFuturist Affair,
2016.
Rovelli, Carlo. The Order of Time. Penguin, 2019.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory in African and Diasporic Futurism

Samatar, Sofia. “Toward a Planetary History of Afrofuturism.” Research in African Literatures, vol.
48, no. 4, 2017, pp. 175–91, https://doi.org/10.2979/reseafrilite.48.4.12.
Thomas, Sue. Technobiophilia: Nature and Cyberspace. Bloomsbury, 2013.
Thompson, John B. Book Wars: The Digital Revolution in Publishing. John Wiley & Sons, 2021.
Thylstrup, Nanna Bonde, et al., editors. Uncertain Archives: Critical Keywords for Big Data. MIT
Press, 2021, https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/12236.001.0001.
Tsegba, Alexis Chivir-Ter. Generation. 31 Mar. 2018, https://www.instagram.com/alexistsegba/.
---. Receiving Light. 15 Aug. 2020, https://www.instagram.com/alexistsegba/.
Weizenbaum, Joseph. Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation. Penguin
Books, 1993.
Yaszek, Lisa. “Afrofuturism, Science Fiction, and the History of the Future.” Socialism and
Democracy, vol. 20, no. 3, 2006, pp. 41–60, https://doi.org/10.1080/08854300600950236.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

