Kleymann, Rabea, et al. “Foreword to the Special Issue ‘Theorytellings: Epistemic
Narratives in the Digital Humanities.’” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 7, no. 4, Nov.
2022, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.55593.

ARTICLE

Foreword to the Special Issue “Theorytellings: Epistemic Narratives in
the Digital Humanities”
Rabea Kleymann1 , Manuel Burghardt2 , Jonathan D. Geiger3 , Mareike Schumacher4
1 Leibniz Center for Literary and Cultural Research, 2 University of Leipzig, 3 Academy of Sciences and Literature Mainz, 4 Technical University of Darmstadt

Keywords: DH theory, epistemic cultures, cultural analytics, philosophy of science
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.55593

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 7, Issue 4, 2022

This special issue deals with existing theory narratives and conceptions in DH
scholarship. Introducing the neologism “theorytellings”, this special issue invites
DH scholars to narrate and discuss their own theoretical contributions to the
field.

The status of the Digital Humanities (DH) as an academic discipline in its
own right has often been discussed in terms of its theoretical foundations
or, more precisely, the lack thereof. “The end of theory” – as proclaimed
by Chris Anderson – has been a recurring narrative in epistemic discussions
about DH for quite some time. Not only do such narratives have a profound
impact on epistemic cultures by constructing research objects and
legitimizing questions, they also coordinate and stabilize the social bonds
within research communities (Ryan 344). Jean-François Lyotard even
emphasizes that such meta-narratives produce and transfer knowledge
between science and society (Lyotard 18). Epistemic virtues, such as claims
to truth and evidence, could be understood through narratives among others
(Plotnitsky 515; Daston and Galison 39). In particular, DH’s emerging
“epistemic cultures” (Knorr Cetina 1) are influenced by narrative
conventions. Therefore, studying reciprocal relationships of existing
narratives and practical DH scholarship could help to promote new
approaches and dialogues as they address a number of important questions:
what does it actually mean for DH’s epistemic cultures to be negotiated
through a “lack-of-theory” narrative? What kind of research is stimulated
by this narrative and how could DH scholars provide “counter narratives”
(Bamberg and Andrews)? What is at stake for enabling critical discourses in
DH?
With this special issue, we seek to bring together scholars from different
disciplines to rethink and envision new perspectives of theory and its
relevance for cultural analytics. To this end, we introduce the neologism
“theorytellings” as a heuristic tool, which we understand as being related
to the well-established concept of “storytelling” (Harré 85; Brandt 215)
in science. Hoping to challenge and reframe existing narratives about the
deficient status of theory in DH, we are particularly interested in specific,
situated, and subjective (research) stories from DH scholars that can function

Foreword to the Special Issue “Theorytellings: Epistemic Narratives in the Digital Humanities”

as shards to a more diverse, kaleidoscopic view on DH theory. Rather than
endorsing ontological commitments or normative claims about theory, this
special issue invites DH scholars to tell about heterogeneous and unfinished
theories in the plural. With that in mind, we assume that our neologism
“theorytellings” is comprised of three relevant functions:
1. Theorytellings refer to an active reporting on the manifold
theoretical undertakings in DH, including the supposedly
“untellable” and “untold” stories of DH theory.
2. Theorytellings help to support interdisciplinary communication
processes, both within the DH and other disciplines as well as to
society.
3. Theorytellings reflect and diversify understandings of theory in the
humanities beyond socio-material arrangements. In short,
theorytellings address not only the needs and issues of DH’s scholars
as they discuss the status of theory regardless of academic career
or discipline, but rather assume that scientific theorizing might be
grasped as an effort comprised of participative and collective actions.
However, the question remains open why precisely stories about theoretical
contributions might be worth telling in DH. In science and especially in
the humanities, “theory” and “theorizing” are semantically highly ambiguous
terms. Depending on their disciplinary backgrounds, research community or
time, humanistic scholars have different understandings of what theory and
theorizing refer to (Abend 175). In Anglo-American contexts, for example,
philosophy and theory are often used synonymously (Cassin et al. vii). While
DH scholars often use theory in the singular form, to express issues of
cultural critique and reflection, theories in the plural form also refer to
“canonical” writings and thinkers. This is accompanied by a personalization
of theory, which comes at the cost of the representation of diverse geographic
and/or gender contexts (Krause 294; Martus and Spoerhase 167).
Furthermore, theories in DH are defined as general propositions or
explanations for research phenomena in a certain domain, or they embrace
specific methodological stances. However, the point to be made here is
that the ontological, normative as well as semantic ambiguity of theory is
a predestined feature for studying some narrative conventions of DH. The
overall aim of this special issue is to discuss the theoretical foundation of DH
research as an epistemic perspective that adds to the current focus on research
practices in DH, which have been focused on data modeling issues, digital
methods, tool building, and infrastructures.
In this special issue, we bring together nine articles dealing with theorie(s)
in DH, each of which is characterized by a specific notion of theory. In
their contribution From Concepts to Texts and Back: Operationalization as a
Core Activity of Digital Humanities, Reiter and Pichler start from a minimal
Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Foreword to the Special Issue “Theorytellings: Epistemic Narratives in the Digital Humanities”

consensus approach towards an understanding of theory as an explanation
for observations and experiments in a given domain. These theories mainly
serve to explain and predict phenomena. However, Reiter and Pichler analyze
the interplay of the praxeology of operationalization and theoretical
presuppositions in exemplary DH projects and extrapolate a best practice
model.
Gius and Jacke take into consideration the “Digital Humanities-asstructuralism” narrative often discussed within the literary studies as a
critique by non-digital towards digital humanists. In their contribution Are
Computational Literary Studies Structuralist?, they present structuralism as
one example of a theory that can be used in Digital Humanities. Thus, they
implicitly define theory as one (of many possible) frameworks of humanities
analysis. By accepting structuralism as a theoretical foundation, they
demonstrate that the “Digital Humanities-as-structuralism” narrative also is
a “Digital Humanities-as-being-theory-driven” narrative and thus a possible
counter-narrative to the implications of the lack of theory.
Freybe and Bischof understand theories as presuppositions used in various
praxeological areas of Digital Humanities such as tools and data. In their
paper Grounding Theory in Digital Data: A Methodological Approach for a
Reflective Procedural Framework, they argue that the challenge for theoretic
DH is to trace back these kinds of hidden theoretic assumptions – that can
be various and even conflicting – and to inspect them together under the
reflective procedural framework of grounded theory.
Kleymann, Niekler, and Burghardt, however, investigate theory as a concept
within DH research. In their article Conceptual Forays: A Corpus-based Study
of “Theory” in Digital Humanities Journals, they present two case studies,
which provide semasiological and onomasiological perspectives on theory as
a concept. Taking into consideration DH journals from a timespan ranging
from the 1960s to 2020, they are able to show that theories in DH often
refer to “canonical” writings and thinkers. In addition to this, their studies
of “theory” embeddings with a pre-trained BERT language model hints not
only at semantic shifts over time. Rather, they highlight semantic similarities
between the concepts of model, tool, method, and experiment.
Not far from the notion of theory Reiter and Pichler use, Roller defines
theory as a conceptual model with the functions of explaining, predicting
and generalizing the outcome of specific analyses. In her contribution Theory-driven Statistics for Historiography: Presenting Pitfalls and a Practical Guide
by the Example of the Reformation, she shows how specific theories can be
used to generate, test and modify scientific hypotheses. However, contrary
to Reiter and Pichler’s contribution, Roller does not understand theories as
extensive frameworks that can be reshaped but not entirely verified or falsified

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Foreword to the Special Issue “Theorytellings: Epistemic Narratives in the Digital Humanities”

by DH scholarly practice, but as a smaller unit that, although mandatory
for research practices, is under permanent (re-)construction and may also be
rejected entirely.
In her article Sailing on Encrypted Seas: The Archive and Digital Memory
in African and Diasporic, Furiasse, who agrees with Freybe and Bischof’s
idea that digital tools and methods are informed by theoretic assumptions,
focuses on practices of memory and storage in digital archives. Starting from
the “end-of-archive” narrative, she imagines alternative narratives for using
digital media inspired by African and Diasporic Futurism, especially within
cultural heritage projects. Furiasse dives deeply into the idea that narratives
can not only be part of explicit meaning-making in research practices but also
serve as metaphorical and symbolic backgrounds. She creates an outstanding
perspective in which fictional and factual narratives complement each other.
In Krämer’s paper Beyond ‘rhetoric of depth’: cultural technique of flattening,
diagrammatic machines and ‘deep learning’, the notion of theory hints at
a form of abstract thinking and reflection and thus with – what seems to
be – essential humanities work. She chooses hermeneutics as one specific
theoretical concept relevant to the DH discourse and aims to critique
approaches from “critical digital humanities” based on a rhetoric of depth.
Instead of hermeneutizing DH, she argues for an embracing of flatness in the
form of surface analysis, applying it as a primary methodological and genuine
DH technique.
In From the Archive to the Computer. Michel Foucault and the Digital
Humanities, Schmidgen, Dotzler, and Stein elaborate on the parallels between
Michel Foucault’s discourse analysis and current statistical semantics based on
Zellig Harris’ distributional hypothesis. In doing so, the authors argue for a
re-reading of the Archaeology of Knowledge and demonstrate how Foucault’s
discursive aspects (i.e., object, style, concepts and themes) and regularities still
address current challenges of computational discourse analysis. Against this
background, the authors discuss Foucault’s position that discourse emerges as
a function which cannot be deductively inferred from features and thus move
towards a critique of GPT language models.
In Windhager and Mayr’s contribution Distributed Cognition and the Digital
Humanities Notes on New Nootechnology, theory is, once again, understood
as a framework of doing research. As one of such frameworks, they use
distributed cognition in order to test its reliability as a stable theoretical
background for DH as a field of research. They argue that cognition is
not only distributed because of interdisciplinarity and team work. Rather,
digital tools developed in this field can be used as an extension of the mind
thus further extending the distributed cognition and serving as a means
of thinking. They conclude that distributed cognition provides a valuable
theoretical lens to reflect on traditional humanities practice while at the same

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Foreword to the Special Issue “Theorytellings: Epistemic Narratives in the Digital Humanities”

time guiding design, development and evaluation of DH technologies. They
thus tell the narrative of tools developed in DH serving scholarly meaningmaking in Digital as well as non-digital Humanities.
We would like to thank all the authors who contributed their epistemic
narratives and theorytellings in DH to this special issue. We also thank the
numerous reviewers whose constructive feedback and suggestions helped to
considerably improve the quality of this special issue. Since this work on
the special issue was impacted by COVID-19, we especially appreciate the
dedication and contributions of those involved. Furthermore, we would like
to thank our working group “Digital Humanities Theorie” from the Digital
Humanities Association in the German Speaking Area (DHd) for many
stimulating discussions and suggestions on the overall topic of theory in DH.
And, finally, special thanks to Andrew Piper (and the team of CA) who not
only offered to edit our special issue, but also patiently guided us through the
publishing process.
Submitted: June 13, 2022 EDT, Accepted: November 30, 2022 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Foreword to the Special Issue “Theorytellings: Epistemic Narratives in the Digital Humanities”

works cited
Abend, Gabriel. “The Meaning of ‘Theory.’” Sociological Theory, vol. 26, no. 2, June 2008, pp.
173–99, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9558.2008.00324.x.
Bamberg, Michael, and Molly Andrews, editors. Considering Counter-Narratives: Narrating,
Resisting, Making Sense. John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2004, https://doi.org/10.1075/
sin.4.
Brandt, Christina. “Wissenschaft.” Erzählen: Ein interdisziplinäres Handbuch, edited by Matías
Martínez, J.B. Metzler, 2017, pp. 211–18.
Cassin, Barbara, et al., editors. Dictionary of Untranslatables: A Philosophical Lexicon. 1st ed.,
Princeton University Press, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1093/acref/9780190681166.001.0001.
Daston, Lorraine, and Peter Galison. Objectivity. 1. paperback ed, Zone Books, 2010.
Harré, Rom. “Some Narrative Conventions of Scientific Discourse.” Narrative in Culture: The Uses
of Storytelling in the Sciences, Philosophy, and Literature, edited by Christopher Nash, Routledge,
1990, pp. 81–101.
Knorr Cetina, Karin. Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make Knowledge. Harvard University
Press, 1999, https://doi.org/10.4159/9780674039681.
Krause, Monika. “‘Western Hegemony’ in the Social Sciences: Fields and Model Systems.” The
Sociological Review, vol. 64, no. 2_suppl, July 2016, pp. 194–211, https://doi.org/10.1111/
2059-7932.12008.
Lyotard, Jean-François. The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. Repr. Manchester Univ.
Press, 1986.
Martus, Steffen, and Carlos Spoerhase. Geistesarbeit: eine Praxeologie der Geisteswissenschaften.
Suhrkamp, 2022.
Plotnitsky, Arkady. “Science and Narrative.” Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory, edited by
David Herman et al., Routledge, 2005, pp. 514–18.
Ryan, Marie-Laure. “Narrative.” Routledge Encyclopedia of Narrative Theory, edited by David
Herman et al., Routledge, 2005, pp. 344–48.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

