Kang, Hyeok Hweon. “How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of
Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667.” Journal of Cultural
Analytics, vol. 8, no. 1, Feb. 2023, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.68188.

ARTICLE

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling
History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667
Hyeok Hweon Kang1
1 Washington University in St. Louis

Keywords: historical network analysis, Gephi, bimodal analysis, criminal network, early modern crime, Chosŏn Korea, smuggling
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.68188

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 8, Issue 1, 2023

This paper takes a network analytic approach to investigating crime in
seventeenth-century Japan. In 1667, the Nagasaki magistrate’s office conducted
the largest documented smuggling crackdown in Tokugawa Japan (1603–1867),
busting a ring of 87 arms traffickers who had been shipping contraband to
Chosŏn Korea (1392–1910). I use the office’s “criminal investigation records”
(hankachō 犯科帳) to build a dataset of the 94 suspects from ten Japanese towns
who were interrogated about their involvement at the time. Using a three-mode
network (people, place, crime), the resulting graphs and statistics reveal a new
geography of the crime in question: contrary to the conclusions of the original
investigators and of modern-day historians who “closely read” their records, the
digital analysis relocates the epicenter of the smuggling ring to be in Tsushima,
not Hakata or Nagasaki, and its ringleader as a merchant named Komoda
Kanzaemon, rather than Itō Kozaemon. Though various limitations are
recognized, the case study demonstrates the utility of network analysis on early
modern crime data in general and for archives built with criminal-investigative
intent like the hankachō in particular.

Introduction
Since the early 2000s, a “network turn” has been underway in the humanities
(Ahnert et al.). As argued by its proponents, the analysis of social and semantic
networks has now expanded beyond the domain of network scientists to grasp
the attention of an increasing number of arts and humanities scholars. To be
sure, the recent interest relates to the “connected” world we live in, defined in
part by online social networking platforms. But the notion of networks runs
deeper, tracing back at least to eighteenth-century graph theory, for example
(i.e., Leonhard Euler’s Seven Bridges of Königsberg problem) (Euler 6670;
Räz). And it has long resonated with modern-day humanists who have studied
inter alia political cliques, information flows, and the circulations of objects,
ideas, and people. If “network scholarship” has existed in many forms, however,
the recent turn is about a quantitative (or computational) shift in the study
and critique of networks. Today, with off-the-shelf softwares like Gephi and
Palladio, researchers can produce network graphs that bring “an immediacy
to our perception of information” (Ahnert et al. 68). These graphs also offer
various epistemic media for data exploration, “from sketch drawings that help
us build intuitions about connectivity, to descriptive data visualisation, to
visual arguments in a final publication” (Ahnert et al. 68).

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

This emergence of the modern “network perspective” is winning acceptance
(Barabási).1 But how useful is it for humanistic inquiry? Proponents of
network scholarship, notably, Ruth Ahnert, Sebastian Ahnert, Chaterine
Coleman, Scott Weingart, Jason Ladd, and others, are subtle: they recognize
the challenges of producing significant research outcomes with network
analysis tools. Indeed, networks, like all data models, entail a great deal of
abstraction and “information loss”—e.g., of literary, paratextual, and historical
contexts (Ahnert et al. 79). Other than being reductive, the representations can
also be “absurdly illegible (in terms of visual complexity),” in comparison to
other more intuitive media such as frequency charts and heat maps (Ahnert et
al. 68). Finally, network analyses through off-the-shelf tools come with certain
dangers: users can feed data into a “black box” and draw misleading insights
without critically engaging with the underlying assumptions (Ahnert et al.
64–70).2
Yet, various consequential case studies have already been advanced. The Six
Degrees of Francis Bacon project, for example, presents the British social
network, allowing researchers to trace connections among figures such as
Francis Bacon, Shakespeare, Isaac Newton, and 13,000 other early modern
individuals (Warren et al.). John R. Ladd has likewise demonstrated the early
modern book trade in Europe, using book dedications as a source base (Ladd).
And various others, including Ruth Ahnert, Sebastian Ahnert, Evan Bourke,
and Song Chen, have shown effective analyses of historical social networks,
emphasizing letter networks, biographies, and literary collections (Ahnert and
Ahnert, “Protestant Letter Networks in the Reign of Mary I: A Quantitative
Approach”; Ahnert and Ahnert, “Metadata, Surveillance and the Tudor
State”; Bourke; Chen).
I contribute criminal networks to this growing field of historical network
analytics. Network scholars from artists to data scientists have demonstrated
the utility of analyzing criminal networks. The Ahnerts and their collaborators,
for instance, open their book The Network Turn with the example of the 9/
11 terror attack and how an American artist accurately captured—with his
web-like diagrams—the financial network behind Osama bin Laden and the alQaeda. Valdis Krebs, moreover, has shown that even a small sample of public
information and newspaper clippings could be analyzed to locate “all nineteen
of the hijackers [of the 9/11 attack who] were within two email or phone call
connections of two al-Qaeda members already known” (Ahnert et al. 3; Krebs).

1 Its proponent Albert-László Barabási, for example, has famously argued how a network approach can advance our understanding of crises, from

epidemics and terrorism to economic and environmental catastrophes.
2 Aspiring practitioners, then, are encouraged to put these tools through a rigorous test and understand their potential utility: researchers may

study the assumptions that are encoded into these network graphing tools; they may also experiment with different registers of abstraction; and
they may discover different kinds of usefulness, by obtaining preliminary graphs for exploratory data analysis, refining results with customized
algorithms, and identifying new areas and opportunities for close reading.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Yet, if recent terrorist activity was a “key driver of the network turn,” as some
argue, organized crime has been with us since time immemorial (Ahnert et
al. 3). Before the rise of modern network science, inquiries into the nature
of interpersonal connections were conducted, especially by states, bureaucrats,
merchants, and importantly for us, criminal investigators. And despite not
enjoying the availability of digital information nowadays, investigators of the
past, too, investigated, exposed criminals, and meted out punishment.
But how did they investigate, we may ask? And what might be learned by
interrogating their “network perspectives,” if any, with modern, digital tools?
Recently, the Ahnerts have begun to answer these questions: they examined
the surveillance practices of historical governments, especially how the Tudor
state might have predicted individuals likely to “trade in intelligence as either
conspirators or double agents.” (Ahnert and Ahnert, “Protestant Letter
Networks in the Reign of Mary I: A Quantitative Approach” 11). The present
paper, however, contributes new research by analyzing criminal networks more
squarely and with the archives produced by criminal investigators themselves
(as opposed to, say, the State Papers, of which criminal activity is a small part).
It also offers a context that is little known to the field of historical network
analytics—maritime East Asia in the seventeenth century.
In 1667, an extensive smuggling enterprise came under the scrutiny of the
Nagasaki magistrate’s office. They confronted an international criminal
organization which had developed between Chosŏn Korea (1392–1910) and
the Tokugawa shogunate (1603–1868) between 1621 and 1667, an
organization which trafficked military contraband from Japan into Korea,
including but not limited to guns, swords, and ingredients of gunpowder such
as saltpeter and sulfur. While busting this organization, the Japanese detectives
then performed the largest documented smuggling investigation in the history
of early modern Japan: they probed 94 suspects, executed 87 (and their family
members), and confiscated the latter’s significant assets into the state treasury
(Kazui Tashiro 田代和生; Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典; Yamawaki Teijiro山
脇悌二郞; Takeno Yōko 武野要子; Maruyama Yasunari 丸山雍成; Miyake
Hidetoshi 三宅英利.; Mori Katsumi 森克己; Yun Yusuk 윤유숙; Knoest).
The extensive administrative effort also left behind the hankachō (犯科帳
“criminal investigation records,” 1666–1867), which contain essential
biographical data on the criminals such as name, age, address, and participation
in crime (Morinaga Taneo 森永種夫. 5; Cullen).
Building a small dataset from this hankachō, I explore, if you will, a “minimum
viable product” of historical criminal network studies (Diminescu 451–58;
Bastian et al. 361–62). Namely, using Gephi, this paper advances a two-part
argument that recognizes both the possibilities and limitations of said analysis.
First, it argues that when pulling from a single, centralized repository of
information (such as criminal records kept by a single office), network analytics

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

can reliably test both the historical “network perspectives” of the Nagasaki
investigators as well as the conclusions of modern-day literature on the subject
(e.g., who were the main culprits, where were they located?).
In fact, we shall see that the use of digital tools dramatically shifts our
perception of the criminal network, generating compelling results that
challenge existing scholarship. Yet, as useful as it may be, the method is limited
for modeling international crime in the early modern period, which necessarily
crosses borders and concerns highly uneven archives (each recorded according
to different conventions and intentions). The question thus arises as to the
general utility of historical network analysis in the scarcity of well-curated
archives like the hankachō (in a sense, “ready-made” for network analysis),
and the resulting abundance of compromises that need to be made for the
historians themselves to mine and build a comparable dataset.

Arms Smuggling on the Korea Strait
The beginning of Japanese arms smuggling goes back to 1621. That year, when
a Dutch official Jan Pieterszoon Coen invaded and subdued the Banda Islands
(part of the Moluccas), he employed to great effect two small contingents
of Japanese mercenaries. These recruits were valued for their martial skill,
partaking in most major campaigns by the Dutch East Indies Company
(VOC). But as efficacious as they were, the Japanese fighters were cruel,
executing local elders by hacking them through the middle, decapitating, and
quartering. And their notoriety deeply concerned the shogunate, which went
on to ban all military exports—mercenaries and weapons alike (Clulow 205).
Yet, just as Coen continued to insist on mercenary trade despite the shogun’s
ban, other buyers were likewise eager to import Japanese military contraband:
Chosŏn Koreans (1392–1910). When the shogunate issued the prohibition
in 1621, it prevented the Koreans from purchasing Japanese arms such as
guns, sulfur, and swords at the Japan House, an entrepot on the southeastern
tip of the Korean peninsula. Combined with domestic shortages and wars,
however, this then prompted the Chosŏn court to circumvent the shogunate’s
prohibition. Ensuing was an international smuggling network which emerged
from royal directives: Korean kings and officials commissioned arms dealing
through formal diplomatic channels such as embassies to Japan and the
daimyos of Tsushima (official brokers of Japan-Korea relations); and
responding to their call were also various on-the-ground agents (military
officers, merchants, and mariners from Korea and Japan) who trafficked
contraband behind the shogunate’s back, and eventually the Tsushima
daimyo’s (Yun Yusuk 윤유숙 292–315).
This smuggling enterprise has not gone unexamined in scholarship. But most
historians have not understood it as a “network,” except for Jurre Knoest.
While advancing an argument about the informal nature of said enterprise,
especially from the Japanese perspective, Knoest contended that the smugglers
formed a “self-organized network”—i.e., a network “not primarily embedded
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

in governmental institutionalization” (Knoest 91). To be sure, the Korean data
shows that the smugglers were far from “self-organized”: they were in fact
sanctioned by the Korean court and orchestrated by its diplomats, interpreters,
and merchants. Still, the network perspective is useful to describe the criminal
organization which spanned the Korean-Japanese border and included both
formal and informal actors of various kinds (Yun Yusuk 윤유숙 292–315).
If the smuggling ring was a relatively complex network, consisting of different
layers of transparency, formality, and stability, the Nagasaki investigation can
be seen as an attempt at “analyzing” said network. Operating far from the main
scenes of arms-dealing, and through a questionable liaison that is the Tsushima
daimyo, the shogunate had many odds stacked against its success. First, because
smuggling networks ran across domains, the trans-regionality of the problem
posed administrative challenges for local authorities with limited jurisdictions.
Second, the shogunate also led this “centralized” criminal investigation in the
periphery, installing yet another (albeit trusted and time-tested) liaison that is
the Nagasaki magistrate’s office. Lastly, due to years of accrued transactions,
which trace back to 1607, arms trade and trafficking had already been deeply
entrenched, and the Koreans refused to turn over their accomplices,
understandably, because that would implicate their high officials and even
royalty.
These obstacles combined to pose a Hydra-like problem for the shogunate,
where cutting off one head sprouted two more in its place: there were previous
crackdowns (e.g., in 1655, which involved 21 executions), but smuggling
seemed to only grow worse (Yun Yusuk 윤유숙 295–99; Kuksa p’yŏnch’an
wiwŏnhoe, Pibyŏnsa Tŭngnok 1656/3/6). How then did the Nagasaki
investigators manage?
Remarkably, after 1667, large-scale arms smuggling disappeared from both
Korean and Japanese records. Many factors contributed to this, including for
example, Korea’s import substitution of Japanese contraband as well as the
start of collaborative Chosŏn-Tokugawa efforts at prohibiting smuggling (e.g.,
transfer of the Japan House, tightening of regulations). But the Nagasaki
investigators performed an efficacious crackdown. They gathered up to 94
suspects from ten Japanese towns in three different domains, tracing back the
criminal network as far as they could. After finding 87 individuals guilty, and
uncovering their past involvement over six years, the shogunate also put on a
gory display as a warning against future criminals (Kazui Tashiro 田代和生;
Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典; Yamawaki Teijiro山脇悌二郞; Takeno Yōko 武
野要子; Maruyama Yasunari 丸山雍成; Miyake Hidetoshi 三宅英利.; Mori
Katsumi 森克己; Yun Yusuk 윤유숙; Knoest; Kang).
This raises the question whether the Japanese navigators possessed a “network
perspective” of their own, one which allowed them to grasp, namely, the overall
“embeddedness” of smugglers in their broader networks and identify
“structurally central” agents who provided seed money and brokerage.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Unfortunately, we do not know what epistemic tools (e.g., charts, diagrams,
tables) were under their employ. Alas, other than tactics such as crossinterrogation and the collection of “confessions” (yōita 白狀) which ratted out
collaborators, the various ledgers, notes, and criminal evidence that may have
bene found are now lost (Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典 412–13). We do have,
however, the aforementioned hankachō, which includes biographical data on
the criminals including their name, social status, age, address, and participation
in crime. Also at the disposal of historians is the conclusion that the Nagasaki
investigators reached with this information at their fingertips—i.e., that one
man named Itō Kozaemon was the “root” (chōhon 張本) of the smuggling
network (Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典 412).
Taken together, these can help formulate a targeted inquiry about the Nagasaki
investigation. If the hankachō preserves the essential metadata of criminals
which the Japanese authorities used, then the same data can be processed
using digital analytic tools for a comparison. That comparison should generate
insights for evaluating the nature of the seventeenth-century “network
analysts.” It should moreover serve to test modern scholarship on the subject,
based on close reading of the investigation records.

From Hankachō to Gephi, Metadata to Network Analysis
It has been shown that even small sets of metadata can be useful for historical
network analysis. In “Using Metadata to Find Paul Revere,” for example,
sociologist Kieran Healy presents a case study that is comparable to the one
proposed here. Drawing on historian David Hackett Fischer’s meticulous
study, Healy sets out to identify key individuals in Boston on the brink of the
American Revolutionary War (1775–1783). He analyzed about 260 “suspects”
and their varying membership in Boston’s seven different organizations (e.g.,
North Caucus, the London Enemies List). The resulting dataset is small, to
be sure, constituting “the merest sliver of metadata about a single modality
of relationship between people.” Yet, the resulting analysis still located Paul
Revere with little difficulty: Mr. Revere, the equestrian patriot, was a member
of many organizations, and he occupied a structurally central position within
the broad community of suspects (Healy; Fischer; Shin-Kap).3
I will use a similar dataset to find the ringleaders of the Korean-Japanese
smuggling network. Compared to Healy’s, the haystack of suspects from the
hankachō is even smaller, including only a set of 94 unique individuals from
ten Japanese towns (Table 1). The metadata, however, is “thicker”: because
it contains different kinds of information—and not just organization
membership, one can set up a multi-modal network. For example, other than
the modalities of person and crime, I added that of “place” to reflect the
particular attention paid by Japanese investigators to the geographical

3 Healy’s work is based on the research of historian David Hackett Ficher. For a similar yet more detailed study using Fischer’s data, see Shin-Kap.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Table 1. Data from the Hankachō*
ID

Last Name

JPN_Name

Type

Place

Crime

1

Ōgi
gi

扇角右衛門

Person

Tsushima

1662, 1663, 1664A

2

Shingu

新宮惣兵門

Person

Tsushima

1662, 1666A

3

Nakajima

中嶋利左衛門

Person

Tsushima

1662

4

Itō
It

伊藤小左衛門

Person

Nagasaki

1663, 1664A

5

Komoda

小茂田勘左衛門

Person

Tsushima

1663, 1664A, 1665, 1666A

高木惣十郎

Person

Hakata

1663, 1664A

…

…

…

6

Takagi

…

…

31

Nakazato

中里弥次右衞門

Person

Tsushima

1664B, 1665, 1666B

32

Oburaya

油屋彥右衞門

Person

Nagasaki

1664B, 1665, 1666B

…

…

…

…

…

95

1662

Crime

96

1663

Crime

97

1664A

Crime

98

1664B

Crime

99

1665

Crime

100

1666A

Crime

101

1666B

102

Tsushima

対馬

Crime
Place

103

Nagasaki

長崎

Place

104

Hakata

博多/福岡

Place

105

Osaka

大阪

Place

106

Shimabara

島原

Place

107

Yanagawa

柳川

Place

108

Miyazaki

宮崎

Place

109

Kurume

久留米

Place

110

Karatsu

唐津

Place

111

Yatsushiro

八代

Place

* This table is a snapshot of the dataset, which includes information on 94 unique suspects who from 10 Japanese towns, and their involvement in seven initiatives
of arms smuggling from years 1662–1668.

distribution of criminals. This in turn opens up greater possibilities for
bimodal analyses to be conducted with different combinations of nodes
(detailed in the next section).
In addition to the dataset, which I manually entered,4 the nature of the original
source—hankachō—has its own affordances as well. If Healy pulled together
multiple rosters in eighteenth-century Boston to “find” the key suspect (Paul
Revere), I employ “after the fact” criminal records from Nagasaki that had
already identified and verified the suspects and their involvement. This means
that with the hankachō alone, one can’t truly play “historical detective,”
expecting to discover new criminals hitherto unnoticed by historians and

4 Thanks to modern Japanese scholars who have already transcribed and translated the original hankachō documents, I was able to manually enter

the data into Excel as a Comma Separated Values (.csv) file, before inputting the data as an edges file into Gephi. Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典
413.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Nagasaki investigators alike. Yet the advantages of working with hankachō are,
first, that even with minimal input and heuristics by the researcher, one can
utilize the primary source as a centralized repository of information to be
network-analyzed.5 Also, because said repository was built with criminalinvestigative intent, it lends itself to more “controlled” comparisons for the
digital humanist: that is, when the intentions of the primary source authors
and modern historians converge, differences in their resulting analyses can take
on further significance.
Yet, speaking of “difference,” does network analysis indeed change the existing
narrative or geography of the crime?

Relocating the Smuggling Ring: In Three Visualizations
This section compares the results of digital network analysis with the
conclusions of the Nagasaki investigators and their historians. In doing so,
it appreciates key differences in the perception of the smuggling network,
particularly with regards to the “who, where, and when” of the crime and
criminals in question.
To date, Japanese historians have predominantly emphasized the
aforementioned merchant Itō Kozaemon and his coterie in Hakata. By closely
reading the hankachō and related documents, they thus affirmed and
substantiated the view of the original investigators (Toyama Mikio 外山幹夫;
Egoshi Hiroto 江越弘人). But my digital analysis relocates the epicenter of the
smuggling ring: another figure named Komoda Kanzaemon (小茂田勘左衛
門) emerges as the uncontested ringleader and his peers from Tsushima as the
prime movers in the criminal network.
This argument is borne out in three visualizations produced on Gephi through
bimodal analyses: 1) a person-crime mode analysis, which visualizes the
interpersonal ties between criminals based on their shared participation in
crime event (Figure 1), 2) a place-people mode analysis, which shows the
geography of the crime based on criminals from the same location (Figure
2), and 3) a crime-people mode analysis (Figure 3), which demonstrates the
connectedness of crime events based on mutual participants.6
The first “criminal network” graph is already revealing (Figure 1). The nodes
here indicate unique individuals, and the edges the ties between those who
collaborated. Using a force-directed algorithm, the graph also shows clusters
where the criminals participated in the same smuggling event, and separations
when they operated independently from each other. I used weighted markers
to render the argumentative “substance” of the graph easily graspable: the

5 However, this is not to suggest that the hankachō is immune to partiality. The author’s discretion was used in flattening the complexities of

some data points, for example, when some individuals had multiple geographical affiliations (due to differences in place of origin and residence).
On the “partial perspectives,” see Ryan and Ahnert 85.
6 A useful guide for multimodal network analysis can be found in a series of blog posts in Seire.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Figure 1. Person-Crime Mode Analysis.
A visualization of interpersonal ties between smugglers as defined by their participation in incidences of crime. Major actors in the network
are labeled with their transliterated surnames.

color and size of nodes as well as the color of edges have been darkened or
enlarged based on the relative frequency of inter-criminal connections. This
enhancement is based on statistical evidence, albeit of a basic kind: the graph
uses a centrality measure called “degree centrality,” the total number of edges
connected to a particular node, to highlight individuals who are bestconnected in the network (Bourke 3–11).
For our purposes, this graph highlights a trio of individuals (Table 2): the
aforementioned Komoda Kanzaemon, who is the epicenter of the entire
network, and to a lesser extent, Nakazato Yajiemon (中里弥次右衞門) and
Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Figure 2. Place-People Mode Analysis.
A visualization of intergroup ties based on geographical background. Places are marked by orange nodes and turquoise labels. Individuals
are marked by grey nodes, and “core” members with their last names in yellow.

Figure 3. Crime-People Mode Analysis.
A visualization of relations between incidences of crimes. Red nodes indicate crime events and the varying thickness of edges represents
relative strength of inter-event connection.

Oburaya Hikoemon (油屋彥右衞門). These individuals are, if you will, the
inner “core” of the smuggling ring. They occupy structurally central positions
in the network, as indicated by the size of their nodes, and by the color of

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Table 2. The “Core” Group
ID

Name

JPN_Name

Type

Place

Crime

Network Analysis Results

5

Komoda

小茂田勘左衛
門

Person

Tsushima

1663, 1664A, 1665,
1666A

Inner core (primus inter
pares)

31

Nakazato

中里弥次右衞
門

Person

Tsushima

1664B, 1665, 1666A

Inner core

32

Oburaya

油屋彥右衞門

Person

Nagasaki

1664B, 1665, 1666A

Inner core

1

Ōgi
gi

扇角右衛門

Person

Tsushima

1662, 1663, 1664A

Outer core

4

Itō
It

伊藤小左衛門

Person

Nagasaki

1663, 1664A

Outer core

6

Takagi

高木惣十郎

Person

Hakata

1663, 1664A

Outer core

their edges as well as inter-nodal gravity. The dark red edges emanating from
them further suggest that the three smugglers were closely associated. To be
sure, there was a second triumvirate of prominent individuals in the bottom
left. This is the outer “core,” consisting of the Hakata merchant Itō Kozaemon
as well as Takagi Sojuro (高木惣十郎) and Ōgi Kakuzaemon (扇角右衛門).
However, while the second trio of smugglers has salient nodes and inter-group
connections, they pale in comparison to the inner core in terms of both degree
centrality—and other network metrics such as betweenness and eigenvector
measures.7
The identification of Komoda as ringleader (and primus inter pares among the
inner core) is a significant divergence from the conclusions of the Nagasaki
investigators and modern-day historians. What’s more, there are four other key
individuals who have largely gone undetected in scholarship (Kazui Tashiro
田代和生; Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典; Yamawaki Teijiro山脇悌二郞; Takeno
Yōko 武野要子; Maruyama Yasunari 丸山雍成; Miyake Hidetoshi 三宅英
利.; Mori Katsumi 森克己; Yun Yusuk 윤유숙; Knoest).
Turning to the second visualization, what about the geographical distribution
of these core groups? The place-people mode (Figure 2) visualizes intergroup
ties based on geographical background. Displaying a total of ten Japanese
towns (orange nodes), and their affiliated criminals (grey nodes), this graph
clusters individuals according to their place of origin, and designates weighted
markers (e.g., size of labels and nodes) to indicate the quantity of affiliated
criminals per location. Incidentally, in order to trace the earlier conversations
on the “core” group, it also marks all of its six individuals with yellow labels.
The first observation that emerges is that there are three important towns:
Hakata, Nagasaki, and Tsushima. Hakata in particular was home to the greatest
number of smugglers (32%), followed by Nagasaki (19%) and Tsushima (18%).

7 I focused on degree centrality because it is the most straightforward and reliable network metric for my particular dataset. Other measures such

as betweenness and eigenvector does confirm with minor variations the composition of both the inner and outer core. However, as shown in
the conclusion of this essay, they turned out to be less “robust” compared to degree centrality—i.e., more susceptible to data loss, based on
results from the Network Robustness Tool by Yann C. Ryan and Sebastian E. Ahnert: https://networkingarchives.shinyapps.io/
network_robustness_tool. Also see Ryan and Ahnert 70–83.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Table 3. Smugglers by Role from the Three Top Towns
Role

Tsushima

Hakata

Nagasaki

All

Main Culprits (e.g., supercargo, investor)

8 (28%)

7 (24%)

13 (45%)

29

Broker

3 (100%)

0

0

3

Interpreter

3 (100%)

0

0

3

Captain

1 (25%)

2 (50%)

0

4

Crew

0

17 (35%)

4 (8%)

48

Other

2 (29%)

3 (43%)

1 (14%)

7

Total

17 (18%)

29 (30%)

18 (19%)

94

At face value, this may be read in support of existing scholarship that
accentuates the Hakata-based individuals. Itō, for example, also served as the
important role of investor, and from Hakata hailed just as many “main
culprits” (shuhan 主犯, e.g., supercargo, investor) as from Tsushima (Table
3).8 However, not only did Nagasaki in fact outscore Hakata in this measure
of main culprits, but in terms of other roles, most Hakata individuals played
minor ones, contributing disproportionately as ship captain or crew.
Navigating the waters itself was an important task, to be sure, but arguably
more central to the criminal network were persons handling logistics. In that
regard, individuals from Tsushima represented an irreplaceable asset: they
provided for instance someone like Komoda Kanzaemon who served as
supercargo on four smuggling operations. The island was also the only supply
of brokers and interpreters (essential for contacting the Koreans) in the
network (Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典 413; Knoest 106–11). It should be noted
as well that Tsushima produced three “core” individuals (marked in yellow
labels)—two of whom belonged to the inner core—while Hakata had two and
all from the outer core at that.
The third graph further shows Tsushima’s prominence in the network (Figure
3). This visualization is based on a crime-people mode analysis of a total of
seven crime events during years 1662–1666. Represented in it are the
connections between crime events in terms of the people shared between them.
The edges have been weighted to show the relative strength of relations
between events: the thicker the edge, the more criminals shared between the
two connected nodes.
What stands out immediately are three disparate groups of events. First, we can
disregard the isolated cluster of nodes in the bottom right of the graph. This
insular group coincides with the crime event, 1666B, which was schemed but
not carried out; it was also led by a new, independent group of smugglers that

8 Arano, “Kozaemon to Kinemon,” 415.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Table 4. Main Culprits from Tsushima and Hakata*
Cluster 1 (1663, 1664A)

Cluster 2 (1664B, 1665, 1666A)

Unique individuals

Total

Unique individuals

Total

Tsushima

Komoda Kanzaemon
Ōgi Kakuzaemon

2

Komoda Kanzaemon
Ōgi Kakuzaemon
Nakazato Yajiemon
Kihara Ichiemon
Kameoka Heiemon

5

Hakata (Fukuoka)

Itō Kozaemon
Shinozaki Den’emon
Takagi Sōjūrō

3

Maeno Magoemon
Murata Ichiemon
Tōsuki Rokurōemon
Sōemon

4

had sprung up for the first time that year. More interesting, however, are the
two clusters of strongly linked events in the bottom (1663, 1664A: hereafter
Cluster 1) and in the top right (1664B, 1665, 1666A: hereafter Cluster 2).
When read in context, these clusters indicate the growing importance of
Tsushima agents over time. As shown in Table 4, counting unique individuals
(main culprits) from each cluster suggests the ascendancy of the islanders in the
network: individuals from Tsushima doubled in number (2 to 5) while Hakatabased ones grew only slightly (3 to 4). More important than just this aggregate
count, however, is the permanence of key individuals over time. Main culprits
from Tsushima such as Komoda and Ōgi (both members of the “core” group)
remained prominent in both clusters, but no one from Hakata did: Itō, for
example, was only involved in Cluster 1, becoming inactive after 1664.9
Why? Given the contextual information available, we will likely never know.
But an important clue is the coincidence of Cluster 2 with the expansion of the
criminal network under Komoda’s leadership. During the years 1655–1666,
Komoda took the reins by doing three things. First, in 1655, he replaced Itō’s
presence by recruiting heavily from Hakata (1665 is ironically the year when
the greatest number of main culprits participated from Hakata). Second, the
next year, Komoda then killed a longtime partner from Tsushima, Shingū,
perhaps to consolidate competing factions: Shingū was part of the first crime
event (1662), which consisted entirely of Tsushima individuals but not
Komoda. Third, under the emerging ringleader, the network grew
geographically. In 1665, he included a great many smugglers from Osaka. The
next year, he replaced the Hakata smugglers entirely by enlisting new members
from four Japanese towns, namely, Kurume, Karatsu, Miyazaki, and Yanagawa
(Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典; Knoest; Kang).

9 According to Knoest’s dataset, there is a certain “Denemon伝右衛門 from Shinozaki” who participated in crime events 1664A and 1666A.

This is a misreading of the original source: the name of the criminal in question is Shinozaki Den’emon who in fact hailed from Hakata, and he
only participated in 1664A. There are other typos and mistakes in the data due to what seems to be accidental duplication. The data for my
network analysis was taken from Arano’s research. See Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典 413; Knoest 106–11. See note 4 for more details.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Taken together, these graphs show that contrary to the findings of the original
investigators and modern-day scholars, the epicenter of the smuggling ring was
Tsushima, not Hakata, and its ringleader Komoda Kanzaemon, rather than Itō
Kozaemon. What explains this discrepancy?

From the Library to the Data Lab and Back
As responsible digital humanists, we should first entertain the possibility that
the visualizations produced in Gephi might be misleading. Some caveats are in
order regarding the nature of the data.
Consider for example potential issues with the criminal records themselves.
Though neatly compiled in the hankachō, the Nagasaki investigators were
never quite done: they could not figure out, for instance, the Japanese
manufacturer (likely in Osaka) who had been supplying contraband armor to
Komoda “due to various circumstances” (Knoest 105). In fact, they in the end
discovered little about Komoda himself. The elusive ringleader used an alias
(Ōku 大久), which might have thrown off the investigators (Arano Yasunori
荒野泰典 466n13). We also know from another source that he trafficked
contraband into Korea as many as fifteen times (Knoest 105), but only four of
his smuggling operations from 1663 to 1666 entered the criminal records.
What the Nagasaki records show is indeed just the tip of the iceberg: if one
closely reads the Korean records, many “main culprits” appear there as well.
The Korean network stretched deep into the peninsula: beginning at the Japan
House, it included the nearby towns of Pusan and Tongnae—their resident
interpreters (yŏkkwan), merchants, and military officers; it also included at
its heart Hansŏng (present-day Seoul), where high-ranking civil officials, the
top brass, and even Korean kings orchestrated the smuggling operations. As
introduced earlier, the Korean enterprise also traced back significantly further
than the seven incidents investigated by the Japanese. Arms trade began as early
as 1607, when Chosŏn opened the Japan House (a trading outpost maintained
by the Sō of Tsushima), and it became after 1621 (the year of the shogunate’s
ban) a smuggling enterprise supported secretly by the Korean kings and
Tsushima daimyos.
Adding this Korean data, however, would not have solved the problem. The
Korean side of the network is amply documented for the entire period
(1607–1661) and often with names and dates. But it is significantly less
amenable for network analyses. Contrary to the hankachō, the information is
scattered across the court annals which were curated for a different purpose
(i.e., to record the king’s daily duties, rather than investigate crime). The data
thus needs to be mined and manipulated to a significant extent by the digital
humanist. And even when processed in this way, the result would be highly
uneven and incommensurate with the hankachō data: some Korean individuals
are mentioned only once in vacuo, while others (mostly office holders) can be
matched with bureaucratic, biographical, and even genealogical data (Kuksa
p’yŏnch’an wiwŏnhoe, Hyŏnjong sillok 1664/2/29; Kuksa p’yŏnch’an
Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

wiwŏnhoe, Pibyŏnsa Tŭngnok 1656/3/26, 1664/3/3, 1664/3/4). The
internationality of the crime as it happened in both Korea and Japan is difficult
to represent with consistency.10
These caveats notwithstanding, the foregoing network analysis still stands.
Despite the absence of significant data and the distractions of secondary
scholarship, the visualizations pointed us to the right direction: it was indeed
Tsushima, not Hakata, that was the epicenter of the Japanese side of the
network.
A close reading of the sources left by the “smugglers” confirms this. While no
records have survived by the hand of Komoda, Itō, or the other individuals
executed in 1667, we have decades of transactions documented in the archives
of the Korean and Tsushima authorities. These archives show, first, that during
the period of open military trade (1609–21), Chosŏn Koreans imported a
significant volume of Japanese arms and armor by dispatching envoys to Japan
as well as purchasing directly from the private markets near the Japan House.
After 1621, both the Chosŏn and Sō pressed on, dealing Japanese goods
behind the shogunate’s back. And the daimyos of Tsushima profited greatly
from this, using arms smuggling as a tactic to gain political and economic
concessions from the Korean court. To be sure, by the 1660s, the Sō of
Tsushima was no longer involved in arms trafficking due to the increased risks
of exposure. But the Koreans then dispatched agents directly to Tsushima
to partner with individual profiteers in the island. Some of these profiteers
were prominent Tsushima officials such as Sago Shikiemon who in 1655 was
ordered disembowelment for dealing with the Koreans. But by the 1660s, as we
learn through the hankachō, other private merchants like Komoda, Ōgi, and
Nakazato had risen to the occasion.
Arms smuggling across the Korea Strait was thus longstanding, systematic, and
orchestrated by state and non-state agents from Korea and Tsushima. What is
surprising, however, is that a basic network analysis run on just the last six years
of this phenomenon revealed a significant clue as to how and where it began.
In this sense, then, network analysis can be better than its data. For this case
study, building a more inclusive dataset would have been impractical due to
the inconsistencies laid out above. It would also have added little value: even
a cursory reading of Korean or Tsushima records shows their systematic
involvement in the smuggling network. The point, however, is that even in the
absence of “complete” data—which is an impossible pursuit anyway, historical
networks are indeed “remarkably robust” (Ryan and Ahnert 85). As Yann C.
Ryan and Sebastian E. Ahnert have convincingly argued, network analyses

10 There was also some information which did not enter Gephi. Depending on the severity of crime, the 87 individuals found guilty were recorded

with differing attention to details such as age, residence, home ownership, and penalty. Such details were excluded from the network data due to
their inconsistency.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Figure 4. Robustness of the smuggling network.
Measured by the Network Robustness Tool developed by Yann C. Ryan and Sebastian E. Ahnert, it shows high stability for the degree
centrality measures up to 75% of data removal or more for in-degree and out-degree. The closeness and eigenvector measures were more
sensitive, likely due to the small size of dataset.

yield reliable results up to more than 50% of random data loss. Their Network
Robustness Tool was built for historical datasets of another order of
magnitude, but feeding the hankachō data into it returns a similar conclusion:
the latter, too, is shown to be highly robust, especially in terms of degree
centrality measures (Figure 4).

Conclusions
Using a small dataset of metadata about criminals, I have demonstrated that
adopting a network perspective can radically alter the conclusions reached
about their history: even when working with the authorities’ data, which
seemed to emphasize a rich Hakata merchant, the network analysis effectively
isolated another individual from Tsushima who was in fact more central. This
conclusion rightfully challenges core assumptions in the archives and related
modern scholarship. It also points to prospective areas of research which may
or may not benefit from network analysis: the evolution of the smuggling
network from the smugglers’ (e.g., Korean, Tsushima) perspective; the history
of commercial and diplomatic exchanges between East Asian states and nonstate agents; and the nature of contraband networks in the early modern world.
For the purposes of this essay, however, let us return to the question posed
above: if not data problems, what explains this discrepancy between the results
of network analysis and those of the original investigators as well as modernday scholars? There are at least two interpretations, not mutually exclusive.
The first is that the Nagasaki investigators lacked a systematic understanding of
the network. During the four decades of arms smuggling (from 1621 to 1666),
many transactions accumulated which would have surprised the shogunate.
But in the end, the shogunate did not know that its neighboring state had been

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

methodically operating an illicit enterprise at its border. Even more important,
they did not realize that their own daimyos—the Sō of Tsushima—were deeply
involved at first, collaborating with the Koreans behind their back.
Of course, the shogunate had its doubts. In fact, the Sō’s secrets came close
to being exposed early on (during a political scandal of 1635) such that they
thereafter withdrew from further arms smuggling. But during the 1667
investigation, the Japanese authorities still suspected the Sō’s knowledge
of—and complicity with—the smuggling incidents, pressing the daimyo to
come clean. In the end, however, the daimyo emerged unscathed: he blamed
the profiteering by individual smugglers, of which the daimyo had no part;
he also used an official explanatory letter from the Korean court to convince
the shogunate that neither his clan nor the Korean court had been formally
involved (Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典 418; Kang).
The Japanese investigation was limited to be sure, but understandably so. For
one thing, we have all been duped by these smugglers: as noted, most modernday historians ended up repeating the assumptions of the hankachō and of its
original compilers perhaps because they read it “too closely” (Toyama Mikio
外山幹夫; Egoshi Hiroto 江越弘人). But digital tools serve not merely to
perform autopsy on historical acts: another interpretation suggests the
investigation in fact was methodical and effective in its own right.
In the absence of knowledge about the entire criminal network stretching
into Tsushima and Korea, it makes sense from the shogunate’s perspective
to emphasize Itō Kozaemon as the “root” of the crisis. Taking an economic
perspective, for example, Itō was indeed a leading investor who financed the
first smuggling transaction in 1663 by providing seed money as well as
arranging for the ship, its captain, and the seamen from Hakata.11 In turn,
because Itō was already a renowned merchant at the time, his crime was easier
to detect and more “profitable” to prosecute. The Hakata merchant not only
owned a house in Nagasaki, the home of the investigation. But he loomed
large in the eyes of both his contemporaries and historians due to the great
wealth he had accumulated from the Dutch trade. When after 1667, Itō and
his sons were executed, his staggering asset of 700,000 taels of silver was also
confiscated, an amount which exceeded the asset of “the third richest person of
the Dutch Republic” (Knoest 100–14, 114n60). In a sense, then, the Japanese
authorities successfully traced the smuggling network as far back as they could,
especially in terms of following the source of the money; it was also effective in
identifying the person of cultural and economic significance who had brazenly
flown in the face of shogunal authority.

11 This is not to backpedal on my argument regarding Tsushima’ salience vis-à-vis Hakata. In reality, investors were dispensable: there were

multiple investors for most transactions, including Komoda himself. Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典 412; Knoest 106–11

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Data Repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/F2MAOK
Peer reviewers: Jo Guldi, Ruth Ahnert

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Javier Cha, Song Chen, David Howell, and members
of the 2022 Humanities Digital Summer Workshop at Washington University
in St. Louis, especially Joseph Loewenstein, Douglas Knox, and Stephen
Pentecost. They provided intellectual stimulation, encouragement, and handson guidance that made this publication possible. I am also deeply grateful
to the two anonymous reviewers of this article for providing generous and
insightful feedback.
Submitted: October 05, 2022 EST, Accepted: November 02, 2022 EST

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

references
Ahnert, Ruth, et al. The Network Turn: Changing Perspectives in the Humanities. Cambridge
University Press, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108866804.
Ahnert, Ruth, and Sebastian E. Ahnert. “Metadata, Surveillance and the Tudor State.” History
Workshop Journal, vol. 87, 2019, pp. 27–51, https://doi.org/10.1093/hwj/dby033.
---. “Protestant Letter Networks in the Reign of Mary I: A Quantitative Approach.” ELH, vol. 82, no.
1, 2015, pp. 1–34, https://doi.org/10.1353/elh.2015.0000.
Arano Yasunori 荒野泰典. “Kozaemon to Kinemon – chieki to kaikin wo meguru danshou” 小左衛
門と金右衞門 - 地域と海禁をぬくる断章.” Umi kara mita Nihon bunka 海から見た日本
文化, edited by Ōbayashi Taryō, Shōgakkan, 1992, pp. 407–47.
Barabási, Albert-László. Linked: The New Science of Networks. Perseus, 2002.
Bastian, Mathieu, et al. “Gephi: An Open Source Software for Exploring and Manipulating
Networks.” Proceedings of the Third International ICWSM Conference, vol. 3, no. 1, Mar. 2009,
pp. 361–62, https://doi.org/10.1609/icwsm.v3i1.13937.
Bourke, Evan. “Female Involvement, Membership, and Centrality: A Social Network Analysis of the
Hartlib Circle.” Literature Compass, vol. 14, no. 4, Apr. 2017, https://doi.org/10.1111/lic3.12388.
Chen, Song. “Governing a Multicentered Empire: Prefects and Their Networks in the 1040s and
1210s.” State Power in China, 900–1325, edited by Patricia Ebrey and Paul J. Smith, University of
Washington Press, 2016, pp. 101–52.
Clulow, Adam. “‘Great Help from Japan’: The Dutch East India Company’s Experiment with
Japanese Soldiers.” The Dutch and English East India Companies: Diplomacy, Trade and Violence
in Early Modern Asia, edited by Adam Clulow and Tristan Mostert, Amsterdam University Press,
2018, pp. 179–210.
Cullen, Louis. “Japanese Archives: Sources for the Study of Tokugawa Administrative and
Diplomatic History.” Japan Review, vol. 25, 2013, pp. 33–65.
Diminescu, Dana. “Introduction: Digital Methods for the Exploration, Analysis and Mapping of eDiasporas.” Social Science Information, vol. 51, no. 4, Nov. 2012, pp. 451–58, https://doi.org/
10.1177/0539018412456918.
Egoshi Hiroto 江越弘人. Toppikusu de yomu Nagasaki no Rekishi 「トピックスで読む」長崎の
歴史. Genshobo, 2007.
Euler, Leonhard. “Leonhard Euler and the Koenigsberg Bridges.” Scientific American, vol. 189, no. 1,
July 1953, pp. 66–70, https://doi.org/10.1038/scientificamerican0753-66.
Fischer, David Hackett. Paul Revere’s Ride. Easton Press, 1996.
Healy, Kieran. “Using Metadata to Find Paul Revere.” Kieran Healy, 9 June 2013,
https://kieranhealy.org/blog/archives/2013/06/09/using-metadata-to-find-paul-revere.
Kang, Hyeok Hweon. Kingpins at Court: Contraband Diplomacy between Korea, Japan, and
Tsushima, 1607–71.
Kazui Tashiro 田代和生. Wakan: sakoku jidai no Nihonjin-machi 倭館: 鎖国時代の日本人町.
Bungei Shunjū, 2002.
Knoest, Jurre. “‘The Japanese Connection’: Self-Organized Smuggling Networks in Nagasaki circa
1666–1742.” Beyond Empires: Self-Organizing Cross-Imperial Economic Networks vs Institutional
Empires, 1500–1800, edited by Cátia Antunes and Amélia Polónia, 2016, pp. 88–137.
Krebs, V. E. “Mapping Networks of Terrorist Cells.” Connections, vol. 24, no. 3, 2001, pp. 43–52.
Kuksa p’yŏnch’an wiwŏnhoe, editor. Hyŏnjong sillok. Seoul, 1955–1958.
---, editor. Pibyŏnsa Tŭngnok. 1959–1960.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

How Network Analysis Uncovers International Networks of Smuggling History: Criminals in Nagasaki, Japan circa 1667

Ladd, Jason R. “Imaginative Networks: Tracing Connections Among Early Modern Book Dedications.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 6, no. 1, Mar. 2021, pp. 180–216, https://doi.org/
10.22148/001c.21993.
Maruyama Yasunari 丸山雍成. Chūō Kōronsha. 1992.
Miyake Hidetoshi 三宅英利. Kinsei Ajia no Nihon to Chōsen Hantō 近世アジアの日本と朝鮮半
島. Asahi Shinbunsha, 1993.
Mori Katsumi 森克己. “Kinsei ni okeru Tsushima mitsu bōeki to Tsushima han” 近世に於ける對
鮮密貿易と對馬藩.” Shien, vol. 54, 1950, pp. 49–73.
Morinaga Taneo 森永種夫. Hankachō: Nagasaki Bugyō no kiroku 犯科帳: 長崎奉行の記錄.
Iwanami Shoten, 1962.
Räz, Tim. “Euler’s Königsberg: The Explanatory Power of Mathematics.” European Journal for
Philosophy of Science, vol. 8, no. 3, 2018, pp. 331–46, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13194-017-0189-x.
Ryan, Yann C., and Sebastian E. Ahnert. “The Measure of the Archive: The Robustness of Network
Analysis in Early Modern Correspondence.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 7, 2021, pp. 57–88.
Seire, Maarja. Gephi Guidelines for Cuneiform Archives. Part 5: Transforming a 2-Mode Network into
a 1-Mode Network. http://persiababylonia.org/archives/methods/gephi-guidelines-for-cuneiformarchives-part-5-transforming-a-2-mode-network-into-a-1-mode-network. Accessed 1 Oct. 2022.
Shin-Kap, Han. “The Other Ride of Paul Revere: The Brokerage Role in the Making of the American
Revolution.” Mobilization, vol. 14, no. 2, June 2009, pp. 143–62, https://doi.org/10.17813/
maiq.14.2.g360870167085210.
Takeno Yōko 武野要子. Shōnin gunzo 商人群像. Reimei Shuppan, 1991.
Toyama Mikio 外山幹夫. Nagasaki Bugyo: Edo bakufu no mimi to me 長崎奉行:江戸幕府の耳と
目. Chuokoronsha, 1989.
Warren, Christopher N., et al. “Six Degrees of Francis Bacon: A Statistical Method for Reconstructing
Large Historical Social Networks.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 10, no. 3, 2016,
http://digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/3/000244/000244.html.
Yamawaki Teijiro山脇悌二郞. Nukeni: sakoku jidai no mitsubo eki 抜け荷: 鎖国時代の密貿易.
Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha, 1965.
Yun Yusuk 윤유숙. “17 segi Cho Il-gan Ilbon-jae mugiryu ŭi kyoyŏk kwa milmae” 17세기 조일간
일본제 무기류의 교역과 밀매.” Sach’ong, vol. 67, 2008, pp. 292–93.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

