Lippolis, Anna Sofia. “Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian
Novel.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 8, no. 2, May 2023, doi:10.22148/001c.68341.

ARTICLE

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel
Anna Sofia Lippolis1
1 University of Bologna

Keywords: Italien novel, canon studies, cultural identity, globalization, social reading platforms, comparative quantitative analysis
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.68341

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 8, Issue 2, 2023

The production, distribution and consumption of the Italian novel in the global
editorial market has accompanied the gradual creation of a national branding
process that does not coincide with the literary identity Italy tends to associate
with. When considering the main analysis approaches of the Italian literary
canon—the top-down one of the country’s yearly national bestsellers, literary
prizes, suggested readings in Literature courses at University and school
anthologies—and the larger-scale, bottom-up view of digital platforms like
Amazon and Goodreads, Wikipedia stands in a middle, unexplored ground
between the two. Through the comparative quantitative analysis of data derived
from some of these sources, this article aims to gain more awareness on Italian
literature from 1980 to 2021, to start addressing why national book prizes
winners do not make it to the global market and if it is possible to talk about a
national cultural resistance, which allowed authors like Elena Ferrante and
Goliarda Sapienza to become literary sensations abroad before it happening in
their own country. While some studies have already dealt with the unchanging
aspect and the lack of diversity of the Italian literary canon, there has been little
quantitative research on the two brands of the country, the national and the
global, and on the dynamics between them. As well as proposing a methodology
for the ongoing study of literary reception of Italian novels under multiple points
of view, this article contributes to the discussion on the reliability of measures for
studying the canon.

Introduction1
If the canon can be defined as the result of the need for self-comprehension of
a society (Curi 7–30), this is a particularly urgent research topic in the case of
Italian literature, whose role, especially in relation to the contemporary period,
is still the subject of many discussions.
Indeed, it is possible to claim Italian identity was a literary construction way
before the institutional acknowledgment of the political unity of the country
in the late 19th century, accounting for the perpetuation of cultural continuity
of a nation that was not united yet. However, today it does not play such
a paradigmatic role in terms of building a common language, cementing a
collective identity and securing aesthetic values through narration, which is
in turn expressed as a canon. Because of its gradual detachment from an
increasingly more globalized and mediatized present, and because it is usually
taught with an isolated perspective, without a real comparative perspective to
other literatures despite its minority role, and also because it is separated from

1 I would like to thank Prof. Giuliana Benvenuti and Prof. Alberica Bazzoni, whose advise was incredibly valuable. I also thank the reviewers who

took the necessary time, effort and expertise to review the manuscript. Their thoughtful comments were extremely helpful and a great source of
improvement for this article.

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

the other arts, the perceived importance of Italian literature throughout all
stages of education has been considered controversial (Benvenuti, “L’Italia in
Italia (e fuori d’Italia)” 31–42; Jossa 333–348). Hence the mild reception of the
debate on the canon and on world literature with respect to other countries:
while in the United States this debate has assumed since the very beginning
political and ideological connotations, for Italian scholars and critics, the
matter has been mainly considered for educational purposes and in opposition
to cultural militancy (Giovannetti 215–29).
In fact, ever since the educational reform “riforma Gentile” of 1923, the canon
of Italian literature in schools has been outlined very rigidly up until the
beginning of the 21st century, when the situation started to become more
uncertain, leading to the almost complete absence of contemporary literature
today (Luperini 11). The circumstances are similar for the case of universities
within the national borders, where despite the peculiar use of anthologies
to periodize and define the history of literature, it is not clear which
contemporary authors are considered “classics” (Benvenuti, “Who Needs
‘Italianness’?” 121–38). Such a confused literary universe has been defined
for the literary production 1990–2000 as a “magma”, difficult to analyze not
only because of the proximity of the period, but also for the crisis of literary
criticism’s ability to sustain cultural communication within an increasingly
powerful literary cultural industry (Asor Rosa 355–422).
It is perhaps for the fear of the inevitable—the slow but steady detachment
between centralized cultural identity and multifaceted reality—that the Italian
literary canon has often assumed coercive and restrictive connotations rather
than inclusive ones. Anthony Tamburri, in his study of Italian Literature in the
United States, has noted that some Italian literary critics, in order to defend a
specific type of establishment, ignore the more and more prominent literary
production connected to “Italianness” when it is not created by people inside
the Italian national boundaries: “at this time, there is not enough attention on
the literary production outside of Italy, both in Italian and English” (Tamburri
150).2 But apart from people with non-Italian origins, the strong boundary
between inclusion and exclusion has also been claimed to be disadvantageous
to Italian authors, such as women writers and authors of what are considered
minor genres.3 It is a systemic issue, as Lidia Curti worded it: “the articulation
of a literary discipline is a form of violence equivalent to the formation of a
nation […] in order to define it, a geographical border is sought, a dominant
culture to give name and substance to its expressions however desperate they
may be” (Curti 167–68).

2 About the relationship between literature and migration, see Vera Horn: “Critics have often associated works of migrant writers to an

intercultural context and to an ethnic prisma (therefore “other”), confining them into extra-literary categories, which makes opaque or even
invisible the possibility of a literary evaluation of such works. It is not rare that they receive an isolated critical treatment […]”.
3 About women writers, see, for instance, Bazzoni, Il genere della letteratura, and Canone letterario e studi femministi. About criticism towards

second-rate genres like detective fiction, see for instance Jana Vizmuller-Zocco.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Whatever the institutional resistance, literary representation in the age of
online reproduction has come to have an international, globalized dimension
that strongly influences its modes of diffusion within and beyond the national
borders and which is worthwhile to analyze. The rise of literary blogs4 has been,
in this sense, a response to a broader public awareness of the need of a renewed
institutionalization of Italian literature, which would bring a new set of values
and aesthetic judgements in order to free genres and other externally imposed
boundaries from well-established models of publishing. Their engagement
level, though, was soon overshadowed by the rise of online platforms for
collectively buying and discussing books such as Amazon and Goodreads,
which opened up new possibilities for controlling the acquisition and
reception of books by readers, with the consideration that collaborative
filtering “at times imitate and at times differ from the conventions of literary
scholarship” (Hegel ii).
Consequently, despite this ever-changing context, correspondence between the
online and offline popularity of books, at least up until the 21st century,
appears to be tighter than expected, while the notion of “classic” has indeed
changed when considering crowdsourced online tagging systems.5 It seems that
the perception of what is a classic may depend upon reinforcements of works as
such through schooling, their transmedial representations, or even what other
users have considered as classics.6
An analysis of norms and modalities of representation in the globalization
process has to take into consideration that the transmission of a canon now
implies the concept of its translatability, that is, its adaptability to different
cultural contexts: a critical step for writers to produce books that can circulate
both at the national and at the international level. A significant year for the
beginning of this process is 1980, when The Name of the Rose by Umberto Eco
and Other Libertines by Pier Vittorio Tondelli were published. Both works have
been read as identifying a common project of reinterpretation or abandonment
of the tradition which marks the entrance of postmodernism into the Italian
literary scene.7 The former was the first Italian book to blur the boundaries
between cultural work and bestseller; Tondelli allowed the world of youth to

4 See Spinazzola, for instance, for an overview of the phenomenon.
5 See Pianzola; Walsh and Antoniak.
6 Walsh and Antoniak 276–277: “For Goodreads and Amazon, a classic is a prominent advertising target value, a marketing tool, and a source of

lucrative adaptation material. For Goodreads users, a classic is a book read in high school, a book that inspired a TV show, or a book that other
Goodreads users have tagged as a classic. As we have shown, the classics industry — the collaborative forces of publishing, film, television,
Amazon, and more — defines the status of popular classics to a large extent. Yet for Goodreads users, a classic is also an invitation to become
amateur critics and creative writers […].”
7 See Benvenuti, Il romanzo neostorico italiano.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

break into Italian literature. It is also in this period that the global market
started to dominate the decisions of publishing houses, which sparked a
phenomenon of academic interest towards Italian literature abroad.8
Today, on the one hand, both offline and on digital social reading platforms
like Goodreads, Italian literature’s privileged position is related to recognizable
images of the Italian identity, its “past symbolic capital” (Sapiro 320–246),
and the association between the “brand Italy” and sophisticated culture.9 Even
translations of modern classics beyond the Italian borders are still benefiting
from this delayed fame, although they are also undergoing a definite
downsizing in terms of status.10
On the other hand, the result of reinterpretation of the “brand Italy” in book
production that is aware of the commercial addition to the Goethean
definitions of world literature is not always backed up by the traditional value
judgement that separates bestsellers from classics and award-winners. It is in
this perspective that within these platforms, readers can develop “tactics to
circumvent and reinterpret the strategies of powerful institutions, […]
including corporate control over book consumption and intrusions into
people’s private reading activity” (Albrechtslund).
An important factor that comes into play in this scenario is the influence of
the Anglophone book/media industry, which guides and sometimes corrects
the Italian market’s ability to access and value cultural products by encouraging
products that are connected in some way to an international context and/or
convey a specific understanding of what and who is considered “Italian”. More
recently, this has been noted for the receptions of Variations on the Theme of
an African Dictatorship trilogy by Nuruddin Farah (Fotheringham 568–83),
of the book Swimming to Elba by Silvia Avallone (Pennacchio 136–55), and
the popular case of Elena Ferrante’s My Brilliant Friend saga,11 and also in
Goliarda Sapienza’s posthumous book The Art of Joy.12
In other words, it is possible to witness the international cultural impact of
several literary products thanks to the clear Italian identity they represent. At
the same time, there are works that emphasize narrative aspects in a globalized
way, even when stories are rooted in Italian landscapes. As with most Italian
works that develop a transnational dimension, there is a balance between these

8 According to Casadei (46), Eco and Tondelli’s novels are symbols of a changed relationship with humanities. Literature itself lost its central role

as a reference framework for writers in the Eighties to music, cinema, visual arts.
9 See Anholt.
10 For instance in the dimension of the publishing houses in the target language, as seen for Sweden in Schwartz and Edfeldt.
11 Where it is also stated that the reception of both books and their subsequent transposition into a tv series is also to be read in a perspective of

confrontation and opposition with respect to the North-American entertainment, causing a polarity of opinions among critics that either are
influenced by the international success or even more bothered by it. See Schwartz (122–142).
12 See Bazzoni, Bond and Wehling-Giorgi (1): “the Einaudi edition of L’arte della gioia came out in 2008, following the success of these foreign

translations, the sheer number of literary reviews, blogs, cultural events, readings, and talks has multiplied both in and out of Italy, and
continues to grow.”

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

two poles, although the specificity of these dynamics is based on the
equilibrium between cultural distinctiveness and the ideal of a symbolic
community beyond the national borders, which is different each time. The
basis for the exportability of Italian literature can be precisely an “extra-literary
content of Italian literature, that may be ethical-philosophical, politicalideological, or even simply ‘mythical’” (D’Intino). This is visible also in the
case of the inclusion of Italian literature in university teaching abroad, where,
in contrast to the Italian situation, bibliographical references in the syllabi
are articulated thematically instead of chronologically (Benvenuti, “L’Italia in
Italia (e fuori d’Italia)” 40).
Among the constellations of digital spaces, Wikipedia is considered to be
relatively safe from the influence of commercial interests and, in this domain,
even a middle ground between social platforms and physical book circulation,13
though authors contributing to the encyclopaedic entries share a similar agency
in the creation of this literary institution.14 Starting from the assumption that
“the work constitutes itself as such in its becoming social, that is to say, in
the transition from being a private fact to public phenomenon” (Spinazzola
46), this project aims to focus on the part of the double nature of the canon
involving the concept of an ever-changing shared value system within a
community both online and offline which mirrors and defines taste and
cultural need and, ultimately, the “selective memory of a population” towards
specific books and authors (Luperini 19).
Taking into account different sources to compare them with Wikipedia’s
information on Italian contemporary literature, the premise is that the canon
“is not one-size-fits-all”,15 but rather that its different online manifestations
give us a clear glimpse of the new dynamics that have been forming in the
publishing industry. This study therefore has the objective of starting a
discussion on novels and the Italian contemporary literary canon as connected
to both the synchronic self-representation and the foreign interpretation of
the Italian identity which results in the “two brands” of Italy, concerning its
resistance to alterity and concerning the ways it is possible to include the digital
dimension in the traditional, critical one. If Wikipedia is a middle ground
between social platforms and physical book circulation, can it be considered
in this context as an intermediary between institution-oriented views of Italian
contemporary literature and readers’ perspectives, also understood as users?

13 See Schwartz. At the same time, it is important to stress that Wikipedia is not safe from bias: see, for instance, Hube (717–721), and Reagle and

Rhue (1138–1158).
14 See Pianzola.
15 Jacob Blakesley, “World Literature According to Wikipedia Popularity and Book Translations: The Case of Modern Italian Poets”. Comparative

Critical Studies, 17: 3 (2018): 433–458.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Related work
Research on Wikipedia has existed since its inception, but only recently have
literary studies turned to the online encyclopedia to better understand the
dynamics of popularity and knowledge sharing within the digital realm. Italian
Wikipedia was included in the comparative analysis of Hube et al. as one
of the biggest Wikipedia language versions, while Jacob Blakesley carried out
a research of the canon for Italian poetry based on the concrete sources of
Wikipedia and publication data on book translations. It seems no study has
been carried out specifically on Italian prose, which could be due, in part, to
the general lack of acknowledgement that the study of online platforms can
help us understand creative and cultural production. Research has focused
on digital social reading platforms as the main online resources for literary
studies16 or, before Amazon and Goodreads became so widespread, literature
blogs.17 Literary consumption via analysis of readership data on Goodreads is
indeed relevant to literary criticism today, as online book discussion can be
itself considered a form of assessment that makes different underlying literary
and ethical values emerge.
In this context, recent critical studies like the ones by Roberto Dainotto and
Giuliana Benvenuti18 about the transmedial representation of Italian literature,
its relationship with world literature, its reception and its success in the age of
Amazon, have set some critical guidelines to study this topic through different
concepts of literary canonicity. While this research will focus on the general
representation of works and authors in the selected data sources, a separate
discussion would be required for the empirical study of the inclusion of Italian
women writers both online and in the academic system.19

Data sources
The sample of works analyzed in this study derives from a query on Wikidata
of Italian books between 1980 and 2021 sorted by the number of versions of
articles in other languages on Wikipedia. All datasets and code are published on
Github.20
The choice of carrying out the analysis for the works and not for the authors
was done from the perspective of comparing editions of the works and literary
award-winners. While data in web platforms may be easier to analyze in an
automatic or semi-automatic way, even when considering information’s
partiality, the case of online portals of institutions (universities, libraries)

16 See Pianzola et al., Wattpad as a resource for literary studies and Digital Social Reading; Walsh and Antoniak.
17 See Spinazzola (eds), Tirature '11.
18 See for instance Giuliana Benvenuti et al. (1–6).
19 See Bazzoni, Canone letterario e studi femministi; De Rogatis.
20 Github repository for the code of Cultural Analytics: an analysis of the Italian contemporary canon, April 2022.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

remains unexplored. Initiatives like OpenSyllabus21 have just started to involve
Italian universities, and bibliographic records of University databases of Italian
peer-reviewed monographs and articles cannot be downloaded or have limited
access. Research on literature teaching in Italy exists, but on specific topics
and with no public data in open format to draw from. As academic data is
a fundamental frame of reference to understand the reception of books, its
exclusion from this study comes with the premise the data sources presented
here do not aim to be exhaustive, but that it is better to start describing and
interpreting the available references with the hope of collectively discussing and
analyzing in different ways the Italian contemporary literary canon.
The data sources used for this study are:
1. Data on global Wikipedia about Italian narrative 1980–2021;
2. Readership data on Goodreads on selected works 1980–2021;
3. Publication data of book editions listed on Goodreads on selected
works 1980–2021;
4. Data on selected Italian literary prizes awarded for narrative,
1980–2021.

Wikipedia
Wikidata is a collaboratively edited knowledge base launched in 2012, working
as a “data repository” with facts from all Wikimedia Foundation projects,
including Wikipedia.22 Its query service represents the perfect starting point
to extract books of Italian contemporary writers available on the platform in
the selected time range.23 A first distinction has to be made, since in Wikidata,
literary works can be referred to as “book” (9 results), “literary work” (199
results) and “written work” (176 results). This last category, although wide,
added novels that were not included in the other two categories. As in this
research individual books belonging to a series appear, “series of novels” has not
been taken into consideration as a label although it is still relevant popularitywise (three series in particular: Ulysses Moore by Pierdomenico Baccalario, My
Brilliant Friend by Elena Ferrante, Licia Troisi’s Chroniques, Wars and Legends
of the Emerged World). Furthermore, selecting the book label in Italian has
produced almost twice as many results as in English.

21 The Open Syllabus Project, accessed March 31, 2022.
22 See Vrandečić and Krötzsch.
23 It is worth to note that there is a Wikisource page about the canon of the works of Italian literature (Wikisource, Canone delle opere della

letteratura italiana, accessed March 31, 2022): there are only 13 works published between 1900 and 2000; novels published from 2000 onwards
are not included at all, as the page seems to be based on literary anthologies published in the 20th century.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Table 1. The first twenty Italian contemporary novels sorted by number of language versions on Wikipedia.
Worka

Author

Number of Wikipedia Language Versions

The Name of The Rose

Umberto Eco

53

Foucault’s Pendulum

Umberto Eco

30

Baudolino

Umberto Eco

26

The Island of the Day Before

Umberto Eco

22

The Mysterious Flame of Queen Loana

Umberto Eco

21

Praga’s Cemetery

Umberto Eco

21

Numero Zero

Umberto Eco

15

Gomorrah

Roberto Saviano

14

Silk

Alessandro Baricco

12

Q

Luther Blissett

12

The Solitude of Prime Numbers

Paolo Giordano

11

The Shape of Water

Andrea Camilleri

9

Assandira

Giulio Angioni

9

If not Now, When?

Primo Levi

8

Pereira Maintains

Antonio Tabucchi

8

The Twelve Abbots of Challant

Laura Mancinelli

8

Indian Nocturne

Antonio Tabucchi

7

Insciallah

Oriana Fallaci

6

The Terracotta Dog

Andrea Camilleri

6

a When works have not been translated into English, the Italian title has been maintained.

Table 2. The eleven most common language versions on Wikipedia about contemporary literary works.
Language

Works on Wikipedia having a page in that language

Italian

195

English

101

French

66

Spanish

39

German

30

Polish

19

Portuguese

17

Gaelic

15

Catalan

15

Dutch

13

Swedish

12

After filtering the 378 results based on the exclusion of works that are not
novels and/or works that have just one Wikipedia page in one language, 207
works emerged (Table 1 shows the first twenty, sorted by number of Wikipedia
language editions). The most common languages these Wikipedia pages are
available in, apart from Italian, were English, French, Spanish, German, Polish,
Portuguese, Galician, Catalan, Dutch and Swedish (Table 2).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Figure 1. Distribution of number of books with more than one language version on Wikipedia for first year of
publication, grouped into five-year periods.

As Fig. 1 shows, the distribution of the books’ first publication year grouped
into five-year spans is uneven and prevailing in the period between 1990 and
2010. The most recently published works, especially from 2010–2019, even if
published during a time of high online presence, are not included or do not
have a language version other than Italian on Wikipedia.
Among the resulting works, out of the 103 authors, some occur more than
once, especially when they have written books in series. For instance, there
are 20 works by Andrea Camilleri, 10 by Valerio Massimo Manfredi, 7 by
Umberto Eco and 6 by Elena Ferrante, Aldo Busi, Alessandro Baricco, Laura
Mancinelli and Licia Troisi. There is quite a disproportion between a total of
26 female authors and their male colleagues. This gap goes hand in hand with
the marginalization and exclusion of women writers within Italian institutions
(as represented and taught in schools and universities): despite their strong
presence in the Italian literary landscape ever since the second half of the 20th
century, they still have to endure a structural scholarly reluctance to face the
unconscious values and the partiality of the national tradition they inherited.
At first glance, the ranking doesn’t show surprising results—many books are
all-time Italian bestsellers—nevertheless, it starts to exhibit the different natures
of Italian contemporary literature. Umberto Eco’s novels are at the top of the
chart, along with classics like Primo Levi’s If Not Now, When?, and Antonio
Tabucchi’s Pereira Maintains and Indian Nocturne. There are bestsellers like
Gomorrah, The Solitude of Prime Numbers, Silk (not by chance, as both
Dainotto and Di Nicola note, the authors Roberto Saviano, Paolo Giordano
and Alessandro Baricco are represented by Wylie Agency, a literary agency

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

with an important role in the export of works abroad); there is also Q by
the collective pseudonymous Luther Blissett, an original historical novel
distributed through copyleft. While Elena Ferrante appears in this ranking for
the first time in the 29th position, it is worth mentioning the Wikipedia page
for her book series Neapolitan Novels has nine language versions, and, were it
included, it would appear high up in this ranking—this says a lot about the
foreign consideration of the author’s work as a single unit divided into equally
meaningful parts, just like the corresponding TV series, rather than standalone
novels. This is also the case with the book series Ulysses Moore by Pierdomenico
Baccalario.
Significant is also the presence in the first twenty positions of two novels by
Andrea Camilleri, part of the famous series of detective stories of Inspector
Montalbano, set in an imaginary but realistic Sicilian province and unique for
the use of an artificial dialect that works as a filler and mixes Italian, Sicilian and
invented words. The local dimension within a noir genre is shared by Giulio
Angioni’s Assandira as well, representative of the so-called Sardinian Literary
Spring.24 Both authors’ successes reflect the relevance of “tourism literature”,
especially in neighboring countries like Germany,25 and the self-exoticizing
tendency of writers as a mediating factor between local identity and drive of
popularity beyond regional borders. The fame of these writers, particularly
for noirs, is thus also tied to the details of a different culture that are being
discovered by a wider audience, a different image of Italy than the stereotypical
one, that of an “utterly unrecognizable place”, without “Renaissance art, […]
leisurely lunches or bustling piazzas […]” (“Underworld”) as has been said
about Gomorrah, but rather of a country where astonishing and intricate
crimes “appear perfectly probable” as described in Camilleri’s detective
stories.26
Apart from Assandira, which also became a movie, and Camilleri’s novels,
which correspond to a TV series, many of the works in the top ranked places
have undergone transpositions and adaptations. Others may be recognized
under the label of “New Italian Epic”, that is, a series of works “simultaneously
complex and popular”, with “basic elements and an allegorical nature in
common”, characterized by a strong critical outlook on reality and a nature
irreducible to consolidated narrative categories (for example Q, Gomorrah, or
Camilleri’s novels).27
Apart from novels mixing history and invention following the success of The
Name of the Rose, (for instance, Mancinelli’s, Maraini’s The Silent Duchess,
Vassalli’s) among the results, it is also possible to see less prestigious genres in

24 On the phenomenon, see Broccia.
25 See Kleinert.
26 See Jones.
27 See Wu Ming.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Italy, such as sci-fi, fantasy and children’s books. Books intended for a young
audience form a particularly marginal genre in the Italian literary system,
despite many having reached international fame thanks to their deliberate
international setting. It may not be surprising that in the context of Wikipedia,
unlike traditional literary anthologies, Italian children’s writers are side-by-side
with writers of other genres: they actually belong to a new generation of Italian
authors unconcerned with moral or pedagogical goals.28
Finally, if we look at these first twenty positions according to the category of
generation of writers, we find that, with the exception of Primo Levi, they
all range from the generation of the thirties to the generation of the eighties.
The “explorers of magma”, leaders of the heterogeneous literary production
1990–2000, on the other hand, are missing.29
While this rank is already representative of the canon of Italian literature
1980–2021 on Wikipedia, results have also been compared with the average
number of in-links (Table 3), a significant measure strongly correlated to the
Page Rank.30 As the page length of each Wikipedia article can depend on
individual editors, it has not been taken into consideration as a relevant
indicator. Page views were also not considered in this analysis.
The number of versions of articles in other languages corresponds to the
crossing of national boundaries, but all incoming Wikipedia links, for instance
those pointing to the Wikipedia page about a certain literary work, are also,
according to the description on the online encyclopaedia, “a rough indication
of how important or popular a page is”.31 Thanks to the Wikipedia API,32 the
variation of in-links from language to language can be automatically counted,
even though in-links for only 165 works were found. The average number of
in-links mirrors the original rank, with Andrea Camilleri’s books, which also
have a TV adaptation, shifting into the upper ranks. If we were to consider
Elena Ferrante’s Neapolitan Novels as a series as well, it would still appear
within the first ranks, also thanks to the success of the TV series. Higher up
with respect to the number of language versions on Wikipedia, is the novel by
Italian singer Fabrizio de André written with Alessandro Gennari, as well as
sci-fi and fantasy novels (for instance, Valerio Evangelisti’s Nicolas Eymerich,
inquisitor), while other works with pages in multiple language versions do not
have as many in-links pointing to them (I’m not scared by Niccolò Ammaniti
is an example). For what concerns languages with the highest number of inlinks to those pages, they follow closely the Wikipedia pages languages division
(Table 4).

28 See Ziliotti; Tabbert.
29 For an overview of contemporary authors classification, see Di Nicola.
30 See Hube et al.
31 Wikipedia, What Links Here, accessed March 31, 2022.
32 Wikipedia, Wikipedia API:Main page, accessed March 31, 2022.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Table 3. Number of in-links pointing to Italian contemporary literature 1980–2020, sorted by highest average (first twenty results).
Work

Author

Average number of in-links

Total number of in-links

Montalbano’s Rice Balls

Andrea Camilleri

70.5

141

The Name of the Rose

Umberto Eco

68

1701

La concessione del telefono

Andrea Camilleri

66

132

Il campo del vasaio

Andrea Camilleri

65

130

Excursion to Tindari

Andrea Camilleri

53.3

160

Rounding the Mark

Andrea Camilleri

52

156

Paper Moon

Andrea Camilleri

52

156

The Patience of the Spider

Andrea Camilleri

51.6

155

The Wings of the Sphynx

Andrea Camilleri

51.6

155

La pensione Eva

Andrea Camilleri

43.6

131

The Snack Thief

Andrea Camilleri

41.5

166

Un sabato, con gli amici

Andrea Camilleri

41.3

124

The Track of Sand

Andrea Camilleri

41.2

165

Voice of the Violin

Andrea Camilleri

40.7

163

Un destino ridicolo

Fabrizio De André,
Alessandro Gennari

40.6

122

Gomorrah

Roberto Saviano

31.5

379

Mr. Palomar

Italo Calvino

28.6

86

The Terracotta Dog

Andrea Camilleri

27.8

167

Foucault’s Pendulum

Umberto Eco

26.8

402

Nicolas Eymerich, inquisitor

Valerio Evangelisti

25.3

76

Table 4. The ten most common language versions of contemporary literary works exist on Wikipedia according to number of in-links.
Language

Total number of in-links

Italian

5427

English

1646

French

742

German

638

Spanish

393

Dutch

154

Portuguese

102

Catalan

82

Polish

64

Norwegian (Nynorsk)

63

Wikipedia and Goodreads compared
Dainotto’s analysis of the “brand Italy” has for the first time taken into account
a critical review of “Italy books,”33 “Italian books,”34 and “best Italian novels”35
on Goodreads. As he noted, there are some notable common characteristics,

33 Goodreads, Shelf: Italy Books. Accessed March 31, 2022.
34 Goodreads, Shelf: Italian books. Accessed March 31, 2022.
35 Goodreads, Shelf: Best Italian Novels. Accessed March 31, 2022.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

especially within the shelf “Italy books”. These are classics, books with strong
regional connotations and/or bestsellers, which may also coincide with
representation by an international literary agency such as Wylie Agency,
cohabit with books not written by Italian authors, but set to give an image of
the stereotypical “Italian lifestyle”: Beautiful Ruins by Jess Walter or Under the
Tuscan Sun by Frances Mayes. “Italian books” and “best Italian novels” exclude
this last genre and have a ranking more similar to the Wikipedia one (Table 1):
in the case of Wikipedia, Elena Ferrante’s novels are not so prominent, there are
more award-winners and of course, at the top, there is The Name of the Rose;
on Goodreads, bestsellers and award-winners like Baricco’s works or Gomorrah
happen to be ranked below less traditionally represented genres like Fantasy
and Children’s Books.

Goodreads ratings
When the resulting works derived from the Wikipedia query are compared by
their rating on Goodreads (Table 5),36 two different ranks emerge. The first
20 positions for what concerns Italian literature 1980–2021 may not exactly
coincide with Dainotto’s aforementioned analysis, as they include, for
instance, the fantasy genre, but is indeed representative: the quality, agentrepresented winners of literary awards, the classics, and the “made in Southern
Italy” identity rooted in the Italian suburbs like Ferrante’s or Saviano’s, are all
present. In this context, the primacy of Umberto Eco as seen on Wikipedia
is less dominant. With respect to the Wikipedia rank, in this comparison,
Elena Ferrante’s My Brilliant Friend saga, even if the first volume is actually
lower rated than the others, occupies the first places and Saviano’s Gomorrah
disappears to make space for other popular noirs (Camilleri’s novels or Donato
Carrisi’s thriller The Whisperer). Historical books remain prominent (Primo
Levi’s novel, and Q by Luther Blissett, Alexandros by Valerio Massimo
Manfredi, Margaret Mazzantini’s Twice Born, Marco Balzano’s I’m Staying
Here), and according to Goodreads, “historical fiction” is indeed the genre
most of the books belong to after “fiction”, followed by “mystery”, “fantasy”
and “nonfiction”. It is also interesting that the presence of Twice Born by
Margaret Mazzantini, as the book only has two article versions on Wikipedia
and 21 in-links in total pointing to it despite a movie adaptation with an
international cast being made. On Goodreads, it was liked by 95% of the people
who read it, has more than seven thousands reviews and a very high user
rating.37
In this analysis, it is not possible to generalise for all readers: demographic
biases are inevitable. Firstly, Goodreads is limited to a number of languages and
countries. In 2017, there was a high prevalence of women, mostly coming from

36 The data has been extracted thanks to Antoniak and Walsh, Goodreads Scraper, Python, 2020.
37 Goodreads, Venuto al mondo by Margaret Mazzantini. Accessed March 31, 2022.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Table 5. Wikipedia results sorted by highest adjusted average rating on Goodreads (first twenty results).
Work

Author

Adjusted average ratinga

The Story of a New Name

Elena Ferrante

4.37

The Story of the Lost Child

Elena Ferrante

4.37

The Drowned and the Saved

Primo Levi

4.29

Those Who Leave and Those who Stay

Elena Ferrante

4.28

Twice Born

Margaret Mazzantini

4.19

The Name of the Rose

Umberto Eco

4.09

The Whisperer

Donato Carrisi

4.09

Pereira Maintains

Antonio Tabucchi

4.09

Q

Luther Blissett

4.04

L’arminuta

Donatella Di Pietrantonio

4.01

Ocean Sea

Alessandro Baricco

4

If not Now, When?

Primo Levi

3.99

The Eight Mountains

Paolo Cognetti

3.98

La casa delle voci

Donato Carrisi

3.96

My Brilliant Friend

Elena Ferrante

3.96

Mr. Gwyn

Alessandro Baricco

3.96

I’m Staying Here

Marco Balzano

3.92

The Snack Thief

Andrea Camilleri

3.91

Alexander: Child of a Dream

Valerio Massimo Manfredi

3.89

The Voice of the Violin

Andrea Camilleri

3.89

a The data has been extracted thanks to Antoniak and Walsh, Goodreads Scraper, Python, 2020.

the United States and more likely to be under 35 years old.38 Also, many of the
readers of Italian books are Italian, so the data on Goodreads cannot reflect
worldwide popularity.
Through Goodreads, it is possible to buy books that are directly linked from
the platform to different online sellers. Looking at the total number of available
editions as listed on the platform, Dainotto’s observations of the brand “Italy”
abroad become more evident, as classics, award-winners and works with a
glocal dimension coexist in the first twenty positions (Table 6). This ranking
differs from the Wikipedia one, with Ferrante’s books in a higher position.
Italo Calvino’s Mr. Palomar shows almost a hundred editions, although it is
apparently less translated than other contemporary bestsellers. On the other
hand, some of the books with many language version pages on Wikipedia have
very few editions, which may correspond to a particularly interested editor or
the authors themselves adding information to the online encyclopaedia (for
instance, Assandira by Giulio Angioni and Laura Mancinelli’s Twelve Abbots of
Challant, with respectively 3 and 6 editions).

38 Goodreads, Who is the average Goodreads user? You’ll be surprised!. Accessed October 3rd, 2022.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Table 6. Italian novels 1980–2021 with more than one language version on Wikipedia sorted by highest number of editions according to
Goodreads (first twenty results).
Work

Author

Total number of editions

The Name of the Rose

Umberto Eco

568

Foucault’s Pendulum

Umberto Eco

236

My Brilliant Friend

Elena Ferrante

210

Silk

Alessandro Baricco

193

Prague’s Cemetery

Umberto Eco

158

Story of the New Name

Elena Ferrante

156

Follow Your Heart

Susanna Tamaro

145

Baudolino

Umberto Eco

143

Those Who Leave and Those Who Stay

Elena Ferrante

143

The Solitude of Prime Numbers

Paolo Giordano

141

The Island of the Day Before

Umberto Eco

134

Pereira Maintains

Antonio Tabucchi

126

Gomorrah

Roberto Saviano

125

Number Zero

Umberto Eco

117

I’m Not Scared

Niccolò Ammaniti

108

The Shape of Water

Andrea Camilleri

108

The Mysterious Flame of Queen Loana

Umberto Eco

102

Ocean Sea

Alessandro Baricco

96

The Lying Life Of Adults

Elena Ferrante

96

Mr. Palomar

Italo Calvino

94

It is worth mentioning the presence of Follow Your Heart in this ranking.
Published in 1994 by writer Susanna Tamaro, the book was loved by the
public—a book had not sold so well since The Name of the Rose, the success
exceeded even Pereira Maintains, which came out the same year and won two
national awards—and attracted many critiques concerning its literary value.
It is not considered to be within the academic literary canon, although it is
said to have marked the beginning of a more consolidated establishment of
Italian women writers.39 On Wikipedia, the book has only five dedicated pages
in different languages.

Wikipedia and Italian literary awards compared
Italian literary prizes are a yearly subject of discussion—writer Teresa Ciabatti’s
statement concerning her exclusion from the finalists of Premio Strega 2021,
“in Italian Literature, I think it’s right to remain an anomaly”,40 highlights
the institutional role of Italian literary awards in preserving cultural tradition
in the thematic and linguistic sense, along with a certain coherence of the
narrating voice. After this episode, the critic Gian Paolo Serino remarked that
it is a mirror of the publishing dynamics today and stated that the choice of

39 As Prof. Alberto Casadei stated when interviewed by Ranieri Polese on Repubblica (October 13, 2008): “Talking about the canon, it is necessary

to distinguish two phases. Up until the Eighties and after. Or, better, before and after Susanna Tamaro’s success.”
40 Premio Strega, Twitter account. Accessed March 31, 2022.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

the finalists for that year was “the best it was possible to come up with to
make people believe it is an award and not an agreement between editors”.41
This dissent has quite a history—the book Q also made it to the final of
Premio Strega in 1999, but, although it was required that the authors behind
the pseudonym Luther Blissett appear at the ceremony, they did not: “We
are not interested in winning, also because the first place is always assigned
in advance […] this year it has already been decided in favour of Maraini”.42
As they predicted, the writer won with Dark, a work that despite this success
has only one Wikipedia page, in Italian. Similarly, when Elena Ferrante was
nominated for the Premio Strega in 2015 with the fourth volume of her My
Brilliant Friend tetralogy, she stated her certainty she had no possibility of
winning—indeed, she did not—, but was happy about the idea of making an
entrance and turning the tables in a fake competition.43 Nominations to such
awards may represent conceptions of literature different from the expectations
of what a first place should be, but it is a matter of fact that winning works tend
to appear in multiple Italian literary awards and are given priority concerning
their diffusion abroad.44 That year’s winner was Ferocity by Nicola Lagioia,
which also won the Premio Mondello, and is also not represented on
Wikipedia, except with the usual page in Italian.
If we consider nine prestigious Italian literary awards (Premio Napoli, Premio
Stresa, Premio Bagutta, Premio Grinzane Cavour, Premio Viareggio, Premio
Strega, Premio Bancarella, Premio Campiello, Premio Chiara), all of which
already existed in 1980, with the exception of the Grinzane Cavour award
(since 1982) and Chiara award (since 1989), do award-winning works tend to
have more visibility on Wikipedia or instead, do public successes make it to
online representation regardless of their trophies?45
Among works with with more than one language version on Wikipedia, only
35 out of 207 have won one of the aforementioned prestigious Italian literary
prizes. Four of them twice: If Not Now, When? by Primo Levi, Pereira
Maintains by Antonio Tabucchi, L’arminuta by Donatella Di Pietrantonio,
and La chimera by Sebastiano Vassalli. Some authors have won more than
once, like Sandro Veronesi with both Quiet Chaos and The Hummingbird
(both for Premio Strega). However, this does not necessarily coincide with a
high number of editions listed on Goodreads or a high number of language
versions on Wikipedia: despite winning twice, L’arminuta, La chimera and
both Veronesi’s winning works have only one Wikipedia page besides Italian,
even if the last two have been adapted into film, and respectively 46 and 31

41 See Aimi.
42 As declared to Io Donna of Corriere della Sera, 15 May 1999, and in another interview on L’Unità on 30 April, 1999.
43 Elena Ferrante, “Elena Ferrante: “Accetto la candidatura allo Strega””, Repubblica, 21/02/2015. Accessed March 31, 2022.
44 See Salvador Pereira da Costa.
45 Literary prizes for this analysis have been chosen according to longevity, relevance and completeness of information about the winners. Some of

them have more than one winning category: in this research, only awards to novels were considered.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

editions listed on Goodreads. Still, transmedial representations of books
enhance the number of in-links to those pages. In some cases, other books
by winning authors reach better results: for instance, Andrea Camilleri’s
Excursion to Tindari won Premio Bancarella, but other novels of his are better
represented and translated on Wikipedia. If the contemporary canon is at least
in part moved by the concept of translatability both in language and content,
this phenomenon can only be a symptom of detachment between the
international market and national value recognition.
More generally, 39 authors with respect to the initial dataset won a literary
award for their novel, which means works of winning authors have no direct
correlation with their presence on Wikipedia. It is still surprising when works
by internationally acclaimed authors barely have a page on the online platform:
Helena Janeczek, for instance, the first woman to win Premio Strega in 15 years
with The Girl with the Leica, won Premio Bagutta in the same year; Igiaba
Scego, winner of Premio Mondello (in 2011, for La mia casa è dove sono) and
Premio Napoli (in 2020, for La linea del colore); bilingual writer and translator
Claudia Durastanti, awarded five literary prizes and Premio Strega finalist in
2019 for Strangers I Know. Apart from the gap between international public
success and critics’ choices, another cause of this phenomenon could be related
to the outlining of a new sense of Italian identity that is irreducible to a unitary
category, thus receiving “an isolated critical treatment” (Horn).

Conclusion
The analysis of the contemporary Italian literary canon on Wikipedia
1980–2021 confirms that it is tightly connected to the concept of national
identity and therefore cannot be described from a single perspective, but rather
by taking into account different value recognition conceptions within different
communities, both online and offline. Works on Wikipedia with more than
one language version may actually be an intermediate representation between
user-oriented views of the canon, as user ratings on Goodreads and the editions
listed there privilege bestsellers and classics, even if belonging to genres that are
considered second-rate in Italy; as well as less diverse, critical-academic ones, as
shown by literary awards winners or internationally acclaimed authors awarded
prestigious prizes whose works may still tend to be considered “extra-literary”.
Furthermore, in-links may indicate that transmedial and serial representation
of novels matter in terms of works’ online visibility and findability.
Both in-links and article translations mostly come from the languages of
countries neighboring Italy such as French, German or Spanish, excluding
English, but relevant actors in the international diffusion of the novels are
also literary agencies and, content-wise, a peculiar glocal dimension far from a
stereotyped Italy. From a gender perspective, in all cases, there is a strong gap
between the representation of male and female authors. In addition, an analysis
that will take into account page views as well will show whether more recent

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

books tend to be less internationally represented on Wikipedia, which may
indicate a general national confusion in the criteria for addressing distinguished
books.
At the same time, all these sources give back a partial vision of receptions
of the Italian contemporary literary canon. Academic data, especially syllabi
and scientific articles, along with further information about translations of
novels, would be a useful addition to give a more comprehensive view of
the situation; there is further exploration of online information to be done,
including Wikipedia-specific data. The Italian case has only started to be
analyzed from these standpoints, and there are now many sources to draw
from for a comparative analysis of works reception ready to embrace a new,
multifaceted Italian identity that does not look back at its past with nostalgia.
Data Repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/YKRGWH
Peer reviewer: Fabio Ciotti (University of Rome Tor Vergata)
Submitted: June 01, 2022 EDT, Accepted: July 01, 2022 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

references
AA.VV. Tirature. Il Saggiatore, 2011.
Albrechtslund, Anne-Mette Bech. “Amazon, Kindle, and Goodreads: Implications for Literary
Consumption in the Digital Age.” Consumption Markets & Culture, vol. 23, no. 6, July 2019, pp.
553–68, doi:10.1080/10253866.2019.1640216.
Anholt, Simon. Competitive Identity: The New Brand Management for Nations, Cities and Regions.
Springer, 2006.
Asor Rosa, Alberto. Scrittori e popolo (1965)-Scrittori e massa (2015). 2015.
Bazzoni, Alberica, et al. “Canone letterario e studi femministi. Dati e prospettive su didattica, manuali
e critica letteraria per una trasformazione dell’italianistica”.” Le costanti e le varianti. Letteratura e
lunga durata, edited by Guido Mazzoni and Simona Micali, Del Vecchio, pp. 139–62.
---. Goliarda Sapienza in Context: Intertextual Relationships with Italian and European Culture.
Rowman & Littlefield, 2016.
Benvenuti, Giuliana. Il romanzo neostorico italiano: storia, memoria, narrazione. 2012.
---. “L’Italia in Italia (e fuori d’Italia): processi di canonizzazione nell’insegnamento universitario.”
Narrativa, no. 38, Dec. 2016, pp. 31–42, doi:10.4000/narrativa.788.
---. “Who Needs ‘Italianness’?: Postcolonial and Migration Italian Literature.” IdentIty. Concepts,
Theories, History and Present Realities (a European Overview), 2015, pp. 121–38.
Benvenuti, Giuliana, et al. “Global Italy: Transmedia Representations of Italianness.” Cinergie – Il
Cinema E Le Altre Arti, vol. 9, no. 18, 2020, pp. 1–6.
Broccia, Michele. “The Sardinian Literary Spring: An Overview. A New Perspective on Italian
Literature.” Nordicum-Mediterraneum, vol. 9, no. 1, 2014, doi:10.33112/nm.9.1.28.
Casadei, Alberto. Stile e tradizione nel romanzo italiano contemporaneo. Il Mulino, 2007.
Curi, Fausto. Canone e anticanone: studi di letteratura. 1997.
Curti, Lidia. “La voce dell’altra: scritture ibride tra femminismo e postcoloniale.” Meltemi Editore srl,
2006.
Dainotto, Roberto. “The Brand Italy in the Age of On-Line Reproduction.” Cinergie – Il Cinema E
Le Altre Arti, vol. 9, no. 18, 2020, pp. 7–15.
De Rogatis, Tiziana. “Elena Ferrante e il Made in Italy. La costruzione di un immaginario femminile e
napoletano”.” Made in Italy e cultura. Indagine sull’identità italiana contemporanea, edited by
Daniele Balicco, Palumbo, 2015, pp. 288–317.
Di Nicola, Laura. “Classici italiani nel mondo. Quale canone per il nuovo millennio?” Narrativa, no.
38, Dec. 2016, pp. 43–54, doi:10.4000/narrativa.793.
D’Intino, Franco. Un canone ‘esterno’ per la letteratura italiana. http://www.treccani.it/scuola/
lezioni/in_aula/lingua_e_letteratura/letteratura_italiana_estero/dintino.html.
Fotheringham, Christopher. “Publishing, Politics and Literary Prizes: Nuruddin Farah’s Reception in
Italy.” African Studies, vol. 77, no. 4, June 2018, pp. 568–83, doi:10.1080/
00020184.2018.1481607.
Giovannetti, Paolo. “Florilegi, crestomazie, storie letterarie: l’eclettismo necessario delle antologie
scolastiche.” Per leggere, no. 11, 2006, pp. 215–29.
Hegel, Allison. Social Reading In The Digital Age. University of California, 2018.
Horn, Vera. La conquista dell’Italia e la questione dell’altro. Letteratura, migrazione e canone
nell’Italia attuale. University of Pisa, 2008.
Hube, Christoph. “Bias in Wikipedia.” Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World
Wide Web Companion - WWW ’17 Companion, 2017, doi:10.1145/3041021.3053375.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Hube, Christoph, et al. “World Literature According to Wikipedia: Introduction to a DBpedia-Based
Framework.” arXiv, 2017, https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.00991.
“Il Genere Della Letteratura: La Storia – 1/4 – La Balena Bianca.” La Balena Bianca, 22 June 2016,
http://www.labalenabianca.com/2016/05/23/il-genere-della-letteratura-la-storia-14/.
Jones, Tobias. “The Yellow and the Black: Fiction and Reality in Italian Noir.” London Review of
Books, no. 10, May 2014.
Kleinert, Susanne. “La ricezione della letteratura italiana contemporanea in Germania e il concetto di
inter- e transculturalità.” Narrativa, no. 38, Dec. 2016, pp. 163–72, doi:10.4000/narrativa.873.
Luperini, Romano. “Il canone del Novecento e le istituzioni educative.” Il canone letterario del
Novecento italiano, Soveria Mannelli, 2000.
Ming, Wu. New Italian epic: letteratura, sguardo obliquo, ritorno al futuro. 2009.
Pennacchio, Filippo. “Da ‘epopea’ a ‘beach read’. Acciaio e i suoi lettori global.” mediAzioni, no. 28,
2020, pp. 136–55.
Pianzola, Federico. Digital Social Reading. 2021, doi:10.1162/ba67f642.a0d97dee.
---. “Wattpad as a Resource for Literary Studies. Quantitative and Qualitative Examples of the
Importance of Digital Social Reading and Readers’ Comments in the Margins.” PLOS ONE, edited
by David Orrego-Carmona, vol. 15, no. 1, Jan. 2020, p. e0226708, doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0226708.
Premio Strega, Serino. “Merita Trevi, Ma Vince Bruck. Ciabatti Fuori? Ma Che Anomalia, Lei è Da
Neuro.” Men On Wheels, 11 June 2021, http://mowmag.com/culture/premio-strega-serinomerita-trevi-ma-vince-bruck-ciabatti-fuori-ma-che-anomalia-lei-e-da-neur.
Reagle, Joseph, and Lauren Rhue. “Gender Bias in Wikipedia and Britannica.” International Journal
of Communication, no. 5, 2011, pp. 1138–58.
Salvador Pereira da Costa, Clara Maria. Narrativa italiana no século XXI segundo o Premio Strega.
Universidade de São Paulo, 2019.
Sapiro, Gisèle. “Translation and Symbolic Capital in the Era of Globalization: French Literature in the
United States.” Cultural Sociology, vol. 9, no. 3, June 2015, pp. 320–46, doi:10.1177/
1749975515584080.
Schwartz, Cecilia. “Ferrante Feud: The Italian Reception of the Neapolitan Novels before and after
Their International Success.” The Italianist, vol. 40, no. 1, Jan. 2020, pp. 122–42, doi:10.1080/
02614340.2020.1738122.
Schwartz, Cecilia, and Chatarina Edfeldt. “Supporting Inter-Peripheral Literary Circulation the
Impact of Institutional Funders of Italian and Portuguese Language Literatures in Sweden.”
Perspectives, vol. 30, no. 5, Oct. 2021, pp. 811–27, doi:10.1080/0907676x.2021.1978512.
Schwartz, Gustavo A. “Complex Networks Reveal Emergent Interdisciplinary Knowledge in
Wikipedia.” Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, vol. 8, no. 1, May 2021, doi:10.1057/
s41599-021-00801-1.
Spinazzola, Vittorio. “Il pubblico nella letteratura.” La democrazia letteraria. Sul rapporto tra scrittore
e lettore, goWare, 2018.
Tabbert, Reinbert. “Approaches to the Translation of Children’s Literature: A Review of Critical
Studies Since 1960.” Target. International Journal of Translation Studies, vol. 14, no. 2, Dec. 2002,
pp. 303–51, doi:10.1075/target.14.2.06tab.
Tamburri, Anthony J. Un biculturalismo negato. “La letteratura «italiana» negli Stati Uniti.” Studi e
testi letteratura italiana e comparata, 2018.
“Underworld.” The New York Times, 2007, http://www.nytimes.com/2007/11/25/books/review/
Donadio-t.html?pagewanted=all.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian Novel

Vizmuller-Zocco, Jana. “I test della (im)popolarità: il fenomeno Camilleri.” Quaderni d’italianistica,
vol. 22, no. 1, Jan. 2001, pp. 35–46, doi:10.33137/q.i..v22i1.9344.
Walsh, Melanie, and Maria Antoniak. “The Goodreads ‘Classics’: A Computational Study of Readers,
Amazon, and Crowdsourced Amateur Criticism.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 6, no. 2, Apr.
2021, doi:10.22148/001c.22221.
Ziliotto, Donatelo. Foreign Children’s Literature in Italian Translation: A Systemic Approach. Isabella
Zeli, 1997.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

