Carrillo-Jara, Daniel. “Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the
Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 8, no. 2, May 2023,
doi:10.22148/001c.73258.

ARTICLE

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the
Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias
Daniel Carrillo-Jara1
1 Muhlenberg College

Keywords: Peruvian Literature, Wikipedia, national literatures, multilingualism
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.73258

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 8, Issue 2, 2023

This paper explores the construction of Peruvian literature in two different
language editions of Wikipedia: Spanish and Quechua. Comparing both versions
I analyze the way they approach the representation and writing of a national
literature in relation to two factors: region (writers from the 25 Peruvian political
regions) and language (words used to provide information about writers). I argue
that the exclusion of cultural contributions of Amazonian regions in both
Wikipedias not only has a high correlation with the regional population and
Gross Domestic Product, but also reproduces a traditional notion of Peruvian
literature. However, because of its accessibility and collaborative nature, the
Quechua Wikipedia innovates by enabling the user community to propose an
alternative representation of national literature. The research also demonstrates
the urgency of engaging and fostering the participation of indigenous
communities in the creation and editing of Wikipedia.

In 2004, Robert McHenry, former editor-in-chief of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica, compared Wikipedia to a public restroom: the facilities may appear
clean and offer a sense of security to users, but they never know who used the
restroom before (Fallis 1662). This idea pretty much sums up the discussion
about Wikipedia in the early twenty-first century when its value, importance,
and usefulness were compared to printed encyclopedias. Currently, Wikipedia
has editions in more than 300 languages. The Spanish version has nearly 2
million entries and more than 6 million registered users. For instance, the entry
about Mario Vargas Llosa, a Peruvian-born writer who won the Nobel Prize
in 2010, has versions in nearly 90 languages and the Spanish page receives an
average of 2,609 visits daily. These numbers show that Wikipedia is one of the
most used tools for learning more about Peruvian literature, its writers, and
their works. Comparison to other (non-digital) encyclopedias is not necessary
nowadays, because Wikipedia has become an object of study for different
disciplines. However, the field of Latin American literary studies has not yet
explored the potential of Wikipedia for researching the writing and
dissemination of the history of national literatures. In this way, this paper is the
first study that uses a data-driven approach to analyze the representation of a
Latin American literature in Wikipedia.
Like the histories of Latin-American literature written in the nineteenth
century (González-Stephan), Wikipedia is now a space where users build a
sense of community by creating, editing, and visiting articles. However, there is
a key difference: if the nineteenth century/written histories relied on the genius
of the intellectual who interpreted and imposed the idea of the nation, the

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

digital world allows the interaction of editors, who dialogue and discuss their
ideas. They use Wikipedia to propose different narrations of the nation or give
notability to specific people. Wikipedia also allows for research across a large
number of languages, not only those spoken in different countries, but within
the same political area.
For instance, Peru is a multicultural and multilingual country with 48
indigenous languages used within the national territory and recognized by the
Ministry of Culture. Nevertheless, the most spoken language in Peru is Spanish
(82.6% of total population), followed by Quechua (13.9%) and Aymara (1.7%)
(Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática 18). These three languages
have Wikipedia versions. In this paper, I explore two versions, Spanish and
Quechua, to analyze the representation of Peruvian literature and the
inclusion/exclusion of authors in the encyclopedia, especially focusing on the
representation of cultural diversity. This study shows that, as an extension of
the Peruvian literary criticism of the last century, Wikipedia editors focus on
certain areas to define a national literature that excludes Amazonian regions
in Peru (Amazonas, Loreto, Madre de Dios, San Martín, and Ucayali). At
the same time, Wikipedia allows the Quechua community to utilize the
encyclopedia in order to provide an alternative literary corpus and history to
the critical discourse in Spanish.

Data
My goal is to analyze the representation of a national literature on Wikipedia,
because it works as a bridge between academic knowledge and people outside
the academy. Concerning the reader motivations to using Wikipedia,
Lemmerich et al. state the importance of school-related reading in the Spanish
version: “While work or school-related motivations account for 10% in English
Wikipedia, they account for over three times as much (31%) in Spanish
Wikipedia”. They also explain that in-depth reading or intrinsic learning is
more frequent in less developed countries, such as Peru. For example, nowadays
the library would not be as good an option for a person looking for the “2010
Nobel Prize in Literature winner”, because there is a larger, faster and more
accessible source than a non-digital encyclopedia: Wikipedia (Fallis 1667). For
this reason, I scraped Wikipedia directly using RStudio, a GUI for the R
language that retrieves all the information the Wikipedia reader has immediate
access to.
The internet has a changing nature: a Wikipedia article could have one
thousand words today, but three thousand words next week. All the data for
this research were retrieved from Wikipedia on December 5th, 2021. Although
the data will have changed in the last months, this variation does not invalidate
the analysis: my conclusions explain a concrete moment in the digital
representation of Peruvian literature. The first step in the scraping process was
to identify what writers were Peruvian according to each Wikipedia version.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

The retrieval is based on the category “Peruvian Writers”, which shows a list of
writers and subcategories. On the Quechua Wikipedia, this category, “Qillqaq
(Piruw)”, included 222 writers and no subcategories.
The Spanish Wikipedia was a more challenging case because the category
“Escritores de Perú” included several subcategories in addition to the list of
more than 300 Peruvian writers. Only twelve subcategories were pertinent
when scraping data from Wikipedia: “Escritoras de Perú” (Peruvian Women
Writers), “Poetisas de Perú” (Peruvian Women Poets), “Escritores de Lima”
(Writers from Lima), “Cuentistas de Perú” (Peruvian Short Story Writers),
“Dramaturgos de Perú” (Peruvian Playwriters), “Escritores de Literatura
Fantástica de Perú” (Peruvian Speculative Fiction Writers), “Escritores de
Literatura Infantil de Perú” (Peruvian Writers of Children Literature),
“Escritores de Novelas Históricas de Perú” (Peruvian Historical Fiction
Writers), “Novelistas de Perú” (Peruvian Novelists), “Poetas de Perú” (Peruvian
Poets), “Poetas de Perú del siglo XX” (20th-Century Peruvian Poets), and
“Escritores LGTB de Perú” (LGTB Writers from Peru). Three prominent
literary writers were included, because they did not appear in the lists of
Peruvian writers, but were subcategories in themselves: Mario Vargas Llosa,
José Carlos Mariátegui, and Inca Garcilaso de la Vega. The final number of
Peruvian writers in the Spanish version was 609.
To collect the data used in this research, I scraped information from articles and
information pages in Wikipedia. A Wikipedia entry includes a title (Peruvian
writer’s name), encyclopedic information, images, references, and usually an
infobox (a table showing relevant information about the author). From these
entries, information about the writer is accessible: birthplace, date of birth,
literary works, among others. Information pages, on the other hand, contain
data that describe the article, not the writer. Wikipedia readers can visit the
page to find out the total number of article words, date of page creation, date
of latest edit, page views, etc. These two sources allow for analyzing three types
of information: data about the writer featured in the Wikipedia article, data
about the creation of the article, and data about its reception. The possibility
to retrieve all this information and the multilingual nature of the platform are
the principal advantages of Wikipedia when researching the construction of
national literatures in the digital world.
Finally, I cleaned the data manually. In this context, cleaning means correcting
spelling mistakes, deleting duplicates, or completing missing information. Two
examples show that non-uniform information creates obstacles when scraping
data from Wikipedia. Infoboxes provide the writer’s birthplace in a format easy
to scrape (a table), but places are not consistent. Different spellings are the most
prominent case: Áncash / Ancash, Cusco / Cuzco, or Junín / Junin. Editors
also provide the city or town but omit the region: Iquitos instead of Loreto
and Trujillo instead of La Libertad. When retrieving data from information
pages there are similar problems. The date of page creation has two different

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

formats: hour - day - month word - year (2:00 pm - 10 - August - 2021) and
month number - day - year - hour (08 - 10 - 2021 - 2:00 pm). Both cases require
researchers to clean data carefully. After this process, I used RStudio again to
create dataframes allowing for the examination of all the information and to
visualize the data.

Wikipedia and Peruvian regional literature
Traditionally, Peru has been considered a country with three geographical
regions: the coastal desert next to the Pacific Ocean, the Andes running
through the middle, and the jungle, which is part of the Amazonian region.
This geography allows for a classification of the 25 Peruvian political regions:
the coast (9 regions and 11.7% of the national territory): Callao, Ica, La
Libertad, Lambayeque, Lima, Moquegua, Piura, Tacna, and Tumbes; the
Andes (11 regions and 28%): Áncash, Apurímac, Arequipa, Ayacucho,
Cajamarca, Cusco, Huancavelica, Huánuco, Junín, Pasco, and Puno; and the
Amazon (5 regions and 60.3%): Amazonas, Loreto, Madre de Dios, San
Martín, and Ucayali. Peru is also a highly centralized country with the most
populated and developed cities on the long narrow coast (the 3 most populated
areas are coastal regions with more than 43% of the total population). Because
Wikipedia provides the writers’ birthplaces, I am exploring the representation
of Peruvian regional literature in Wikipedia and its correlation with 3 factors:
population, Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and Internet access.
Using information from infoboxes and Wikipedia article content, I identified
the number of authors from every Peruvian region (see Figure 1). There are
574 writers born in Peruvian regions in the Spanish Wikipedia (18 authors were
born in foreign countries and 17 have no birthplace listed because they use
pseudonyms or the information is incomplete) and 214 in the Quechua version
(3 writers were born outside of Peru and 5 have incomplete information). The
fact that there are only four authors born in Spain in the Spanish Wikipedia,
and none in the Quechua Wikipedia, is a surprise when considering the history
of Peru, a Spanish colony until 1821. Indeed, on the Spanish Wikipedia,
colonial Peruvian writers, many of them born in the Iberian Peninsula, do
not have an article or are not included in the category “Peruvian Writers”.
Furthermore, the category “Cronistas de Perú” (Peruvian Chroniclers) is
totally different from “Escritores de Perú”. It means that around 30 authors,
Peruvian and Spanish, who wrote about the conquest and the early years of
the colony, are not considered representatives of the national literary tradition
according to the Spanish Wikipedia.1

1 The Wikipedia article “Literatura del Perú” does include them as part of Peruvian literature. This entry is not part of the analysis because there

is not a Quechua version. However, future research could compare the Peruvian authors in the article with the category “Escritores de Perú”.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Figure 1. List of Peruvian regions of birth on the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias (574 and 214 writers respectively).

Figure 1 also reveals that writers from the coast and the Andes are
comprehensively represented. The top 10 regions of birth include the regions
from both areas, while the Amazon is almost not present. On the Spanish
Wikipedia, the Amazonian regions are in the seventeenth and nineteenth
position (Loreto with 6 authors and San Martín with 3), and there is only
one Amazonian region in the Quechua version (San Martín with 1 writer).
At the same time, 3 areas from the Amazon are totally absent in the Spanish
list; 4 are absent in the Quechua one. To be clear, those places do appear on
both lists with a 0 next to the name of region2. I added them to the list after
retrieving all data from both Wikipedias, because of my previous knowledge of
Peruvian political division. However, a regular reader of Wikipedia could infer
that literary production does not exist within these Peruvian regions.
The prominence of regions such as Lima, Arequipa, La Libertad o Cusco, and
the absence of the Amazon is related to external factors. Figure 2 and 3 reveals
that the distribution of the population and GDP in Peru has a high correlation
with the number of authors in both Wikipedias (for instance, rPearson = 0.98
and 0.99 for the Spanish version). This almost linear relation shows that
regions with more population density and economic development have more
representation. In the case of the Quechua Wikipedia, Cusco and Ayacucho
stand out, although are not outliers, because the order of the regions of birth
has changed. In comparison to the Spanish version, Andean regions where
there are more Quechua speakers have moved to higher positions. In other

2 Tumbes is another absent region in the category “Escritores de Perú”. This area is at the bottom of the Peruvian population and GDP ranking.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Figure 2. Classification of 25 Peruvian Regions on the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedia according to their population in
2021 and percentage of writers in the encyclopedia. This figure shows the Peruvian population in 2021 according to INEI
projections (Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática 20).

words, their representativeness has increased. In Cusco and Ayacucho, 54.2%
and 62.5% of the population speak Quechua respectively.3 Puno, with 42.3%
Quechua speakers, now occupies the fifth position. However, this percentage
of speakers has a very low influence on the representation of the Peruvian
regional literature in Wikipedia (rPearson = 0.15), while the population and
GDP still have a strong correlation (rPearson = 0.93 and 0.94 for the Quechua
Wikipedia). For this reason, I suggest that the concentration of people (labor)
and money (capital) as an indicator of socioeconomic development is a central
predictor of the Peruvian literary geography on both Wikipedias.
Furthermore, Internet access has a very low correlation (rPearson = 0.36).
In general, the percentage of the population with access to the Internet in
the Peruvian regions ranges from 38% (Loreto and Cusco with the lowest
percentages) to 80% (Lima and Callao in the first places). Figure 4 shows that
regions with an access rate higher than 70% have a minimal representation on
Wikipedia. For instance, two Amazonian areas (Madre de Dios and Ucayali)
have an access rate higher than 50%, but they also have no writers on both
Wikipedias. In fact, in the last years, regions in the Amazon have had the
highest increase in Internet access: “Las regiones con mayor crecimiento
porcentual de conexiones a Internet fijo respecto al mismo periodo del año
pasado fueron Amazonas (114,7%), Pasco (69%), Apurímac (44,6%) y Madre
de Dios (40,6%)” (“The regions with the highest percentage increase in wired

3 All the information about the percentage of Quechua speakers comes from the latest national census in 2017. See Andrade Ciudad

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Figure 3. Classification of 25 Peruvian Regions on the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedia according to their Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) in 2020 and percentage of writers in Wikipedia. This figure shows the Peruvian GDP in 2020
according to “Perú: Producto Bruto Interno”.

Internet connections with respect to the same period last year were Amazonas
(114.7%), Pasco (69%), Apurímac (44.6%) and Madre de Dios (40,6%)”)
(“Reporte estadístico”). Although some research identifies availability of
connectivity as the best predictor of digital representation (Graham,
Straumann, and Hogan), a higher connectivity did not mean an increase in
the representativeness of Amazonian literature as part of Peruvian literature on
Wikipedia. Technology used to access the Internet may provide an explanation.
In the first quarter of 2021, 86.7% of the Peruvian population accessed the
Internet through a cell phone, while only 14.9% used a computer (“El 55.0%
de los hogares”). Therefore, in Peru, more accessibility does not mean more
representation in the digital world, because most Peruvians use cell phones,
which impose restrictions when editing a Wikipedia entry.
I have no doubt that socioeconomic development influences the representation
of Peruvian regional literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias. Of
course, GDP refers to economy, but it also gives an idea of the resources that
regional governments can use for building and maintaining infrastructure,
creating jobs, improving public schools, or investing in cultural activities. This
translates into an environment favorable for editing Wikipedia entries. I want
to emphasize here three reasons for the unequal digital representation pointed
out by Graham and Dittus (108-10) that may also explain the Peruvian case:
capacity to engage in voluntary labor, economic conditions to spend time
writing on Wikipedia, and digital literacy.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Figure 4. Classification of 25 Peruvian Regions on the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedia according to their Internet
Access in 2020 and percentage of writers in the Wikipedia. This figure shows the regional Internet access in 2020
according to “Población que accede a Internet”

While digital representation of Peruvian regional literature reflects inequality
in capital distribution, I also suggest that it reflects inequality in literary studies.
As Samoilenko et al. proposes, it is not unusual that Wikipedia extends
academic biases: “Thus we find that Wikipedia, despite offering a democratised
way of writing about history, reiterates similar biases that are found in the
‘ivory tower’ of academic historiography” (“Analysing Timelines”). In the
following paragraphs, I offer an overview that demonstrates that both
Wikipedias, Spanish and Quechua, reproduce how 20th-century Peruvian
literary criticism approached the construction of national literature.
In the first half of the 20th century, the canon of Peruvian writers consisted
of those born originally either in Spain or in Lima: Juan del Valle y Caviedes
(1645-1697), Manuel Ascencio Segura (1805-1871), Felipe Pardo y Aliaga
(1806-1868), Carlos Augusto Salaverry (1830-1891), Ricardo Palma
(1833-1919), José Santos Chocano (1875-1934), among others. There were
only two exceptions: Inca Garcilaso de la Vega (1539-1616) and Mariano
Melgar (1790-1815), who were from Andean cities (Cusco and Arequipa). The
literary field changed around the 1960s when an alternative canon arose: the
post-oligarchic canon (García-Bedoya Maguiña 160). Due to the changes that
occurred in Peruvian society in the preceding decades, the most prominent
authors were related to different regions, although most of them published in
Lima. This is the case of writers such as César Vallejo (La Libertad, 1892-1938),
Mario Vargas Llosa (Arequipa, 1936), and José María Arguedas (Apurímac,

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

1911-1969). By the end of the 20th century, with authors from the coast and
the Andes considered canonical writers, no author from the Peruvian Amazon
occupied a predominant position in the corpus of national literature.
This tendency to exclude the cultural contributions of the Amazon can be
traced back to the foundation of Peruvian literary studies at the beginning of
the century. In 1905, Jose de la Riva-Agüero published Carácter de la literatura
del Perú independiente, a critical and historiographical work that began to
conceptualize Peruvian literature: “La literatura del Perú, á partir de la
Conquista, es literatura castellana provincial” (“The literature of Peru, after
the Conquest, is provincial Castilian literature”)4 (Riva-Agüero 220). Peruvian
literature is part of the Spanish tradition: a nation that repeats European
models. It makes sense that the most prominent Peruvian writers in this book
were white men who wrote in Spanish and were mostly from Lima. In the
1920s, two critics responded to this approach to emphasize an aspect of
Peruvian literature that had been totally ignored by Riva-Agüero. The literary
history proposed by Luis Alberto Sánchez5 included pre-Hispanic literature
and indigenous folklore, especially cultural manifestations in Quechua (29).
And in his chapter “Proceso a la literatura peruana”, José Carlos Mariátegui
stated: “Una literatura indígena, si debe venir, vendrá a su tiempo. Cuando los
propios indios estén en grado de producirla” (“An indigenous literature, if it
must come, will come in its own time. When the Indians themselves are able to
produce it”) (283). Mariátegui was confident that literature would become the
cultural expression of the indigenous population. In short, if Sánchez placed
indigenous literature in the past, Mariátegui imagined it as the national
literature of the future. The texts of literary criticism and history that sought
to construct a Peruvian literature did not change these approaches much in
the following decades until the 1980s when Antonio Cornejo Polar (188)
proposed to include ethnic literatures (oral literary expressions in indigenous
languages) as part of the national tradition.
The above summary reveals that the construction of Peruvian literature
oscillated between two geographical spaces: the coast (particularly Lima) and
the Andean mountains. Riva-Agüero’s proposal concentrated on Peruvian
literature written in Spanish and located basically in Lima, with writers such
as Felipe Pardo y Aliaga and Ricardo Palma. Sánchez and Mariátegui referred
exclusively to the Andean region: the former used the term aboriginal
literature, but only described Inca cultural expressions in Quechua; the latter
proposed the possibility of an indigenous literature after discussing
indigenism, which represented the abuses against indigenous people in the
Andes. Although, theoretically, Cornejo Polar’s ethnic literatures encompassed

4 I am responsible for all the translations from Spanish to English.
5 Sánchez published the first volume of his history in 1928 and subsequent volumes appeared in the following years until the definitive edition of

1973.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

all literary manifestations in indigenous languages, the critic is thinking
exclusively of the Andean world. His three paradigmatic writers are quite
evident: José Carlos Mariátegui, César Vallejo, and José María Arguedas; all
of them renowned for including an Andean indigenous perspective in their
work. Even at the beginning of the 21st century, this dual perspective continued
to shape national literature. At the International Conference of Peruvian
Narrative held in Spain (May 2005), a polemic arose concerning the fictional
representation of the internal conflict in Peru (an armed conflict between the
Government and guerilla groups like Shining Path). The controversy opposed
two groups called “criollos” (in Peru, this word designates the cultural
manifestations of the coast that have a European influence, as in the case of
“música criolla”) and Andean writers. The former were authors from Lima
who represented the conflict from that locus of enunciation, the latter wrote
with an Andean perspective6. Therefore, it is urgent to ask: where was
Amazonian literature when the critics imagined Peruvian literature? (At least
for Cornejo Polar, Amazonian literature appears very briefly in footnote 57,
page 125).
The Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias reiterate this exclusion of the Amazon
in the national literary tradition. It is worth noting that Wikipedia editors
use different criteria to evaluate articles, one of which is notability: “People
are presumed notable if they have received significant coverage in multiple
published secondary sources that are reliable, intellectually independent of
each other, and independent of the subject” (“Wikipedia: notability”). The
absence of Amazonian writers in historiography and criticism about Peruvian
literature also means fewer academic papers, essays, or presentations about
these Amazonian authors. This factor may influence the number of entries
on regional writers. Wikipedia users do not have enough academic sources to
write the articles or, if they do write them, the sources could not be considered
sufficient to establish notability. For example, only 2 of the 9 articles on the
Amazonian authors include more than 4 references. Paraphrasing Graham and
Hogan (7), notability creates a sort of feedback loop. If a regional literature
in Peru is underreported, there are no sources. If there are no sources, then
Wikipedia editors do not always have enough information to report about that
region.
The absence or exclusion of the Amazonian literary tradition is not the only
strategy when constructing the Peruvian national literature. Literary studies
have also narrowed this tradition. As Best Urday and Sucasaca acknowledge,
the city of Iquitos, in the Loreto region, has been the center of Amazonian
literary production:

6 About this dual perspective, see Nieto Degregori.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

La cultura letrada amazónica del siglo XX tuvo como eje
principal a Iquitos. Esto se refleja en la presente antología que -al
reunir autores que comienzan a publicar entre 1957 y 1989-, está
conformada casi íntegramente por literatura procedente de dicha
ciudad, evidenciando las principales líneas de trabajo del periodo,
así como a sus autores más representativos.
(The Amazonian lettered culture of the twentieth century had
Iquitos as its main hub. This is reflected in the present anthology
which, by bringing together authors who began to publish
between 1957 and 1989, is composed almost entirely of literature
from that city, showing the main lines of work of the period, as
well as its most representative authors). (Best Urday y Sucasaca
10)
Therefore, there are many studies of literary criticism on the literature in
Iquitos (Loreto), but very little research has been done on the literary
production in the other Amazonian regions. As a result, the terms Iquitos
and Amazonia are often used interchangeably, because criticism reduces
Amazonian literature to works written by authors from this city. The Spanish
Wikipedia reiterates this process when, in the first paragraph of the article
on Peruvian literature, the link “Literatura amazónica” leads to the article
“Literatura iquiteña”.
In conclusion, as Graham et al. (159), I propose that digital representation is
accelerating for those cultural traditions with a strong tradition of criticism
and research: Peruvian literary expressions from the coast and the Andes.
Nevertheless, in recent years, the literary tradition of the Amazonian regions
is being rediscovered and consolidated thanks to research on the regional
literatures or specific authors7. This process is taking place both in the academy
and in the digital world, where contemporary writers disseminate their works.
However, the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias do not reflect this new
flourishing context. Therefore, this section should end with a question: How
can we engage user and communities interested in including the latest research
on Amazonian literature?

Quechua Wikipedia and its challenges
After more than a hundred years, the writing of the history of Peruvian
literature continues to be in Spanish: texts in Spanish that speak of a national
literature in a country with around 50 languages. If the book includes a section
about Quechua literature, it is in Spanish: Spanish-speaking writers who write
to Spanish-speaking readers. However, technology and the internet offer the

7 In the field of literary history, a pioneering work is Toro Montalvo, Historia de la Literatura Peruana. Literatura Amazónica (1996). Recent

works include Gómez Landeo, Huamán Almirón, and Noriega Hoyos, Literatura amazónica peruana (2006); Marticorena Quintanilla,
“Loreto en su literatura” (2007) and Proceso de la literatura amazónica peruana (2009); Villa Macias and Martínez Lizarzaburu, La literatura
en Ucayali (2009); and Vírhuez, “La literatura en Iquitos” (2021).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

opportunity for communities to tell their own “historias” in their own
language. In this section, I argue that Quechua Wikipedia is not just an
imitation or an extension of the Spanish version, but a platform where users
express their own concerns and preferences. In words of Massa and Scrinzi
(213), the Quechua community possess a specific Linguistic Point of View
(LPOV), that not only diverges from the Spanish LPOV, but also from the
Neutral Point of View (a Wikipedia norm that requires writing entries
representing all views without bias).
Since Wikipedia offers information not only about Peruvian authors, but also
about the articles themselves, it is possible to compare two aspects of
Wikipedia: the process of creating the article and its popularity (the process of
receiving it). For the first case, I use two factors: the total number of words
in the article and the total number of edits. The relationship between the
two factors shows the preference or interest of Wikipedia users in a particular
Peruvian author. For the second case, the number of edits and visits to the
article in the last 30 days indicate the interest that the article generated at
a specific time and its dissemination among users. These data demonstrate
that different language versions of Wikipedia relate to different cultural
communities that have their own motivations for creating, editing, and visiting
articles, even if they inhabit the same territory.
On Wikipedia, writers whose articles are the longest and have the most edits are
the most prominent. This means that there is interest in writing and updating
their biographies, works, and cultural value. Mario Vargas Llosa is by far the
most important Peruvian writer on the Spanish Wikipedia (see Figure 5). The
Peruvian author not only constitutes a separate category (like José Carlos
Mariátegui and Inca Garcilaso de la Vega), but his article is also the one with
the highest number of edits (4930 editions). Juan Espinosa Medrano’s article
is very similar in terms of the total number of words. However, the number of
edits makes the difference (Espinosa Medrano’s entry has 471 edits), because
Vargas Llosa is still publishing, while Espinosa Medrano died in the
17th-century. Although both axes (total words and total edits) have their own
prominent writers, the authors with a canonical status on Wikipedia are those
who combine both factors: their entries are constantly expanded and updated
because the community believes that information about their life, work and
cultural value should be disseminated. As such, users continue to edit and
extend their articles.8 These canonical authors do not necessarily have to be
alive to be relevant. Mario Vargas Llosa, César Vallejo, and José María Arguedas

8 There is not a single set of principles for measuring canonicity in the digital world. Hube et al. (18-19) proposes 5 ranking measures: page

length, number of in-links, PageRank writers, PareRank complete, and number of page views. Blakesley (2) states that Wikipedia pageviews
provides insight into synchronic canonicity. Deijl, Smeet, and Bosch (29) explain that the canonical status depends on the volume of searches
on Google. Instead of a single factor, this research proposes that a canonical writer on Wikipedia is defined by the combination of at least two
factors. This is a subject that still needs to be investigated.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Figure 5. Classification of 609 Peruvian Writers (Spanish Wikipedia) according to total number of words and total
number of edits.

are the most prestigious writers on the Spanish Wikipedia: Vallejo died in
1938 and Arguedas in 1969. Although they are no longer publishing, the user
community extends their value to the present.
The field of prominent authors according to total words and total edits looks
completely different in the Quechua Wikipedia (see Figure 6). First, the large
difference in the number of words and edits in comparison to the Spanish
version, which is due to a smaller community working to create and maintain
the Quechua version, is remarkable. Moreover, the same authors (Mario Vargas
Llosa, César Vallejo, and José María Arguedas) stand out, but their status is
totally different. Vargas Llosa has the article with the most edits, but it is so
brief that it only consists of a list of works. Arguedas is the only writer who
can be considered prominent in this Wikipedia, because the user community
not only lists his works, but also explain the value of his life and work (this
author is widely recognized for his defense of Andean culture and for using
Quechua-influenced Spanish in his literary works). In general, in this version of
Wikipedia, the writers with the longest articles are those who use Quechua in
their literary works, such as Carlos Falconí Aramburú and Andrés Alencastre
Gutiérrez. In this way, the Quechua LPOV creates its own notability criteria,
because writers that promote the Quechua language are more important than
those with academic recognition.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Figure 6. Classification of 222 Peruvian Writers (Quechua Wikipedia) according to total number of words and total
number of edits.

Prestige is related to the construction of literary value, while popularity is the
way in which the community interacts with a product at a given time9. In the
period from November 6 to December 5, 2021 (30 days), the most popular
Peruvian writer in the Spanish Wikipedia was Mario Vargas Llosa (see Figure
7). In fact, this writer is the most prominent no matter what encyclopedia
criteria is evaluated. In addition to having a smaller community, editors and
visitors interact much less with the Quechua Wikipedia10. In fact, no articles
were edited during that month. Visits were also much lower: while the Vallejo
page in the Spanish version had 25605 visits, the most popular author, Enrique
López Albújar, on the Quechua encyclopedia only had 44 and Mario Vargas
Llosa had 23.11
In addition to the tremendous numerical difference (the Spanish Wikipedia has
15,002 active users; the Quechua version: 36), it is obvious that Quechua and
Spanish Wikipedia communities have their own LPOV’s and quite different
ideas of their national literatures. So, two constructions of Peruvian literature
coexist in Wikipedia. For example, the Quechua Wikipedia’s list of 222

9 This difference between prestige and popularity is partly based on Porter’s approach, even though he proposes that prestige is tied to the

academy.
10 The most active editors and visitors to the Quechua Wikipedia are not located in Peru, but foreign countries (United States, Argentina, Brazil,

Canada, Germany, among others). Although my goal is researching about representation, but not participation on Wikipedia, it is worth
mentioning that multilingualism and migration could constitute the defining features of this community. About the linguistic factor,
researchers have already identified its importance in the formation of Wikipedia communities: “This study finds multilingual users are much
more active than their single-edition (monolingual) counterparts … smaller-sized editions with fewer users have a higher percentage of
multilingual users than larger-sized editions” (Hale) and Samoilenko et al. (“Linguistic Neighbourhoods” 16) state that bilingualism is one of
the best explanations for the similarity of interests between cultural communities.
11 Wikipedia provides information about visits, not about unique visitors. A visitor can visit a Wikipedia page several times on the same day.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Figure 7. Classification of 609 Peruvian Writers (Spanish Wikipedia) according to total views and total edits in the last 30
days (Nov 6 to Dec 5, 2021).

Peruvian writers differs from the Spanish version. 154 of them appear both in
the category “Escritores de Perú” (Spanish Wikipedia) and “Qillqaq (Piruw)”
(Quechua Wikipedia). However, 44 are considered Peruvian writers only in the
Quechua encyclopedia, not in the Spanish edition. Even though these 44 have
entries in the Spanish Wikipedia, they are not part of the category “Escritores
de Perú”. The reason for their inclusion in the Quechua Wikipedia is not
based on language since most of them publish in Spanish, not in Quechua.
This group, moreover, includes several non-fiction writers, which are part of
different subcategories on the Spanish Wikipedia. While in the Quechua
version, all writers are included in the same category regardless of literary genre,
the Spanish encyclopedia separates authors of short stories, novels, poems, and
essays, among others.
The next group is the most notable: 24 authors have articles in Quechua, but
not in the Spanish version (see Table 1). In some cases, the absence from the
Spanish Wikipedia is surprising, since they are intellectuals with influential
publications and no strangers to academic recognition. As such, notability
would not be a problem when creating their articles. This is the case for authors
such as Jorge A. Lira, José Luis Ayala Olazával, William Hurtado de Mendoza,
among others.12 It means that the Quechua Wikipedia community has created
an image of Peruvian literature that differs from the national literature in

12 The 24 authors are an example of countercanon: “The countercanon is composed of the subaltern and « contestatory» voices of writers in

languages less commonly taught and in minor literatures within great-power languages” (Damrosch 45).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Table 1. Peruvian writers on the Quechua Wikipedia without a page in Spanish.
Writer

Year of Birth

Date of Page Creation

Region of Birth

Reynaldo Martínez Parra

1910

2010

Ayacucho

Jorge A. Lira

1912

2010

Cusco

Teófilo Cárdenas Alvarado

1926

2009

Cusco

José Tapia Aza

1930

2017

Puno

Lily Flores Palomino

1937

2017

Apurímac

Ranulfo Amador Fuentes Rojas

1940

2008

Ayacucho

Víctor Antonio Tenorio García

1941

2008

Ayacucho

José Luis Ayala Olazával

1942

2018

Puno

William Hurtado de Mendoza

1946

2011

Cusco

Nonato Rufino Chuquimamani Valer

1946

2009

Puno

Eduardo Ninamango Mallqui

1947

2010

Junín

Fredy Amílcar Roncalla

1953

2010

Apurímac

Carlos Huamán López

1959

2010

Ayacucho

Hilda Cañari Loaiza

1959

2015

Cusco

Isaac Huamán Manrique

1959

2010

Huancavelica

Carmelón Berrocal Evanán

1964

2006

Ayacucho

Andrés Prado

1971

2020

Lima

Dolores Ayay Chilón

1973

2012

Cajamarca

Edwin Ramos Flores

1977

2021

Ayacucho

Jorge Alejandro Vargas Prado

1987

2015

Cusco

Edwin Lucero Rinza

1995

2021

Lambayeque

Elizabeth Ocsa Quispe

1998

2021

Cusco

Leonel Alexander Menacho López

NA

2015

NA

Armando Azcuña Niño de Guzmán

NA

2010

Puno

the Spanish version. Moreover, the community does not seek to translate its
proposal into Spanish: Quechua-speaking users write for other Quechuaspeaking users.
In academic studies on Peruvian literature, translating Quechua literature to
bring it closer to the Spanish-speaking public is more common. In 1905, the
same year that Riva-Agüero’s influential history was published, Tarmapap
pachahuarainin appeared in Tarma, a small town in the Peruvian Andes. The
author, Adolfo Vienrich, compiled poems and short stories in Quechua, and
included an introduction and translations in Spanish. Jorge Basadre’s
Literatura inca (1938), the first anthology of Quechua literature, applied the
same strategy. Since that founding moment, no history of Peruvian literature
has been written in a language other than Spanish.13 In this context, the
Quechua Wikipedia is a fundamental resource, as users interact within this

13 James Higgins published A History of Peruvian Literature in 1981; the Spanish translation was published in 2006. Literary criticism in

Quechua is rare in Peru. Some examples are Atuqpa Chupan, a journal with 7 issues, and Wankawillka (2013) by Pablo Landeo, where he
reflects on the oral tradition. There is no text that attempts to reflect on national literature. The only work with this scope is the Quechua
Wikipedia.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

space to write their own narrative about Peruvian literature and propose
alternatives to the idea of national literature created in the Spanish-speaking
academic field.
It is not only that each community pursues its own goals when including and
excluding writers in a national literature. The use of different languages implies
ways of narrating that necessarily vary, as is the case with Spanish and Quechua.
In that sense, Wikipedia allows for the comparison of two languages working
to achieve the same purpose: to introduce the life, works and cultural value
of authors to a non-academic public. In other words, the image of a national
literature changes due to the lists of Peruvian writers and the particularities of
the language.14
Table 2 shows the 20 most prominent words in both Wikipedias. To determine
them, I converted all entries from the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedia into
literary data (a dataframe with two columns: all words and the number of times
they were used) using Rstudio. In the case of the Spanish version, I removed
stopwords such as prepositions or articles. Table 2 reveals similarities between
the Spanish and Quechua version due to the nature of the encyclopedia. Thus,
the words that stand out are those related to the date of birth, such as year
(“año”, “años”, “watapi”) or month ("killapi); place of birth (“perú”, “piruw”,
“lima”); and education (“estudios”, “colegio”). In the latter case, the National
University of San Marcos, the oldest university in the country with its
foundation in 1551, has a privileged position, since several words that are part
of the institution name appear in both lists: “Universidad Nacional Mayor
de San Marcos” and “Mama Llaqtap San Markus Kuraq Yachay Sunturnin”.
Many Peruvian writers are linked to the university, either as students or
professors. On the Quechua version there are more words for biographical
purposes, for example, birth (“paqarisqa”) or name (“sutiyuq”). As mentioned
above, it is common for this Wikipedia to present only a brief biography and a
list of works.
On the other hand, the differences between the two lists show that the
languages emphasize different aspects when constructing the idea of a national
literature. In Spanish, the country as a totality is fundamental. Therefore,
“perú” is the word in the first position and its adjectives are also present
(“peruano” and “peruana”) along with “nacional”. In contrast, Quechua
privileges the relationship with smaller geographic spaces, such as cities and
towns: the word “llaqtapi” is in second place and it specifically means “in the
town”. The fact that “lima” is more frequent than “piruw” confirms that the
cities where writers are born are more important than the whole country in
the Quechua Wikipedia. Similarly, the Spanish version includes a set of words
referring to the writing and publication of texts: work, literature, book, writer,

14 Quechua is a family of languages. However, the majority of articles on Wikipedia are written in Southern Quechua, a standard established by

Rodolfo Cerrón Palomino in Quechua sureño. Diccionario unificado quechua-castellano, castellano-quechua (1994).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Table 2. List of the 20 most used words in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedia.
Spanish

Quechua

Word

Count

English
Translation

Word

Count

English Translation

perú

2103

Peru

watapi

452

yeara

lima

2079

Lima

llaqtapi

421

city

universidad

1298

university

killapi

336

month

años

1088

years

mama

309

mother

nacional

1087

national

sutiyuq

218

name

peruano

973

Peruvian

paqarisqa

214

to born

san

955

saint

lima

176

Lima

obra

798

work

piruw

173

Peru

peruana

747

Peruvian

yachay

167

learning

año

699

year

wañusqa

155

to die

literatura

695

literature

runaqa

152

man

poeta

658

poet

simipi

136

language

poesía

647

poetry

qillqaqmi

133

writer

estudios

636

studies

llaqtayuq

129

citizen

libro

609

book

san

127

saint

escritor

550

writer

qhichwa

115

Quechua

colegio

548

school

hatun

103

great

gobierno

538

government

karqan

101

to be

diario

496

newspaper

llaqtap

101

city

revista

483

journal

kastilla

99

Castilla

a Quechua is an agglutinating language that forms words by adding morphemes. For example, the word “llaqta” appears three times in the list with different

morphemes and meanings: “llaqtapi” (in the city), “llaqtayuq” (of the city), and “llaqtap” (citizen). Although I have simplified the translation, this does not
influence my reasoning.

and journal (“obra”, “literatura”, “libro”, “escritor”, and “revista”). The list
even includes the literary genre of greatest relevance with the words “poeta”
and “poesía.” In Quechua, the articles offer a different perspective: instead
of focusing on those aspects, language is the main factor in describing the
writers. Thus, there is a concern to clarify whether the authors write in Spanish
(“kastilla simipi”), Quechua (“qhichwa”), or both. Of course, in Spanish, the
articles do not make this clarification because it is assumed that Spanish is the
default language of Peruvian literature. For this reason, Quechua Wikipedia
pages develop strategies of resistance that acknowledge its importance in the
national culture.
The Wikipedias in Spanish and Quechua reveal two communities with specific
LPOV’s that use the platform to propose different narratives of Peruvian
literature. In that sense, they are independent systems that work under their
own logic. For example, a user of the encyclopedia will find that the versions
present lists of writers that differ. The user will also notice that each Wikipedia
has its own most prominent writer, who represents the values of the
community: Mario Vargas Llosa, whose novels in Spanish won him a Nobel
Prize, and Jose María Arguedas, the main representative of Quechua influence
in Peruvian literature.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Conclusion and Further Work
Research on inequality of digital representation usually uses a global approach,
and focuses the gap between the Global North and Global South. The former
works as a core with the power and ability to represent the latter, a periphery.
However, this study preferred a local approach that shows the functioning of
peripheries (the Amazonian regions and the Quechua language) within the
periphery (Peru).
This paper reveals that, while some zones reflect traditional views of a national
literature, Wikipedia also permits a challenge to the construction of Peruvian
literature in the Spanish-speaking field. Both the Spanish and Quechua
versions reduce the cultural diversity of the country by constructing a national
literature that ignores the contribution of the Amazonian regions. This
reproduces the approach in academic criticism that oscillated between the coast
and the Andes when defining the national literature. At the same time, because
of Wikipedia’s accessible and collaborative nature, the encyclopedia enhances
the participation of diverse communities in constructing a national literary
tradition. The encyclopedia in Quechua is a notable example, since it
constitutes a foundational moment in the construction of a national literature
written by Quechua-speakers for Quechua-speakers. This tension between
tradition and innovation within Wikipedia coincides with the results of the
research on Google and the canon of Dutch literature: “While Google’s
representation of literary canonicity partly depends on that tradition, we can
now establish that the Web also enables new notions of literary importance”
(Deijl, Smeets, and Bosch 28).
As a result, it is evident that there are still several issues to be addressed. The
exploration of diversity on Wikipedia requires the study of another
fundamental aspect: the representation of female writers (18.6% in the Spanish
version; 14.3% in the Quechua version). Future academic work should explore
the reasons for this gap and determine which women writers still do not have a
Wikipedia page. Also, the issue of cultural diversity remains an open question.
Research should also design a data collection process to identify the
representation of Afro-Peruvian, Nisei, and Tusán writers (Peruvians with
Japanese and Chinese ancestry, respectively), just to mention a few ethnic
groups. It is also necessary to compare the two Wikipedia versions analyzed in
this paper with the Aymara version, another indigenous Peruvian language.
In conjunction with these projects, the research shows the importance of
working with local communities to close the gaps in Wikipedia. In other words,
attracting different social groups to interact with Wikipedia is urgent. The
number of visits and edits to the Quechua Wikipedia in November 2021
demonstrates that the community is not yet large enough and is basically
located outside of Peru. More people are needed to create pages about Peruvian
writers and explain their contribution to the national culture. In the same way,
Wikipedia user communities in the Amazonian regions should be responsible

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

for the inclusion of their writers in the encyclopedia, although those
communities first need to be created. For this reason, a Public Humanities
project with the power to mobilize cultural communities should be the next
step in the process of writing and challenging the history of Peruvian literature
in Wikipedia with a cultural diverse perspective.
Dataverse Repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/SYHGNO
Peer reviewer: Evelin Heidel (Wikimedistas de Uruguay)
Submitted: June 14, 2022 EDT, Accepted: July 12, 2022 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

references
Andrade Ciudad, Luis. “Diez noticias sobre el quechua en el último censo peruano.” Letras (Lima),
vol. 90, no. 132, Dec. 2019, pp. 41–70. Crossref, doi:10.30920/letras.90.132.2.
Base de Datos de Pueblos Originarios de Perú. “Lista de lenguas indígenas u originarias.” BDPI,
https://bdpi.cultura.gob.pe/lenguas. Accessed 20 Aug. 2020.
Blakesley, Jacob. “World Literature According to Wikipedia Popularity and Book Translations: The
Case of Modern Italian Poets.” White Rose Research Online, 2020, https://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/
162962/.
Cornejo Polar, Antonio. La formación de la tradición literaria en el Perú. Centro de Estudios y
Publicaciones, 1989.
Damrosch, David. “World Literature in a Postcanonical, Hypercanonical Age.” Comparative
Literature in an Age of Globalization, edited by Haun Saussy, Johns Hopkins UP, 2006, pp. 43–53.
“El 55,0% de los hogares del país accedieron a internet en el tercer trimestre del 2021.” Instituto
Nacional de Estadística e Informática, 2021, https://m.inei.gob.pe/prensa/noticias/el-550-de-loshogares-del-pais-accedieron-a-internet-en-el-tercer-trimestre-del-2021-13269/.
Fallis, Don. “Toward an Epistemology of Wikipedia.” Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, vol. 59, no. 10, Aug. 2008, pp. 1662–74. Crossref, doi:10.1002/asi.20870.
García-Bedoya Maguiña, Carlos. “El canon literario peruano.” Indagaciones heterogéneas. Estudios
sobre literatura y cultura, Grupo Pakarina, 2012.
González Stephan, Beatriz. Fundaciones: canon, historia y cultural nacional. La historiografía literaria
del liberalismo hispanoamericano del siglo XIX. Iberoamericana Vervuert, 2002. Crossref,
doi:10.31819/9783865278005.
Graham, Mark, Ralph K. Straumann, et al. “Digital Divisions of Labor and Informational
Magnetism: Mapping Participation in Wikipedia.” Annals of the Association of American
Geographers, vol. 105, no. 6, Sept. 2015, pp. 1158–78. Crossref, doi:10.1080/
00045608.2015.1072791.
Graham, Mark, Bernie Hogan, et al. “Uneven Geographies of User-Generated Information: Patterns
of Increasing Informational Poverty.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers, vol. 104,
no. 4, June 2014, pp. 746–64. Crossref, doi:10.1080/00045608.2014.910087.
Graham, Mark, and Martin Dittus. “Geographies of Digital Exclusion.” Data and Inequality, Pluto
Press, 2022. Crossref, doi:10.2307/j.ctv272452n.
Graham, Mark, and Bernie Hogan. “Uneven Openness: Barriers to MENA Representation on
Wikipedia.” Oxford Internet Institute Report, 2014, https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2430912.
Hale, Scott A. “Multilinguals and Wikipedia Editing.” Proceedings of the 2014 ACM Conference on
Web Science, June 2014. Crossref, doi:10.1145/2615569.2615684.
Hube, Christoph, et al. “World Literature According to Wikipedia: Introduction to a DBpedia-Based
Framework.” arXiv, 2017, https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.00991.
Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática. “Perú: Estado de la población en el año del
Bicentenario.” Bicentenario Perú 2021, 2021, https://www.inei.gob.pe/media/MenuRecursivo/
publicaciones_digitales/Est/Lib1803/libro.pdf.
---. Resultados Definitivos. INEI, 2018.
Lemmerich, Florian, et al. “Why the World Reads Wikipedia: Beyond English Speakers.” arXiv, 2018,
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.00474.
Mariátegui, José Carlos. “El proceso de la literatura.” 7 ensayos de interpretación de la realidad
peruana, Biblioteca Ayacucho, 1928, pp. 191–296.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias

Massa, Paolo, and Federico Scrinzi. “Exploring Linguistic Points of View of Wikipedia.” WikiSym ’11:
Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Wikis and Open Collaboration, Association of
Computing Machinery, Oct. 2011, pp. 213–14. Crossref, doi:10.1145/2038558.2038599.
Nieto Degregori, Luis. “Los escritores andinos, la violencia y la invisibilidad.” Argumentos. Revista de
Análisis y critica, Nov. 2008, https://argumentos-historico.iep.org.pe/articulos/los-escritoresandinos-la-violencia-y-la-invisibilidad/.
“Perú: Producto Bruto Interno por años, según departamentos 2007-2020.” Instituto Nacional de
Estadística e Informática, https://www.inei.gob.pe/estadisticas/indice-tematico/producto-brutointerno-por-departamentos-9089/.
“Población que accede a Internet.” Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática,
https://m.inei.gob.pe/estadisticas/indice-tematico/population-access-to-internet/.
Porter, J. D. “Popularity/Prestige.” Stanford Literary Lab, no. 17, 2018, https://litlab.stanford.edu/
LiteraryLabPamphlet17.pdf.
“Reporte Estadístico.” Organismo Supervisor de Inversión Privada En Telecomunicaciones, Aug. 2021,
https://www.osiptel.gob.pe/media/20xboji0/reporte-estad%C3%ADstico-24082021.pdf.
Riva-Agüero, José de la. Carácter de la literatura del Perú independiente. E. Rosay Editor, 1905.
Samoilenko, Anna, Florian Lemmerich, et al. “Analysing Timelines of National Histories across
Wikipedia Editions: A Comparative Computational Approach.” Proceedings of the International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, vol. 11, no. 1, May 2017, pp. 210–19. Crossref,
doi:10.1609/icwsm.v11i1.14881.
Samoilenko, Anna, Fariba Karimi, et al. “Linguistic Neighbourhoods: Explaining Cultural Borders on
Wikipedia through Multilingual Co-Editing Activity.” EPJ Data Science, vol. 5, no. 1, Mar. 2016,
pp. 1–20. Crossref, doi:10.1140/epjds/s13688-016-0070-8.
Sánchez, Luis Alberto. La literatura peruana. Derrotero para una historia cultural del Perú. Ediventas,
1989.
Urday, Best, et al. Allí donde canta el viento. Antología de literatura amazónica. Casa de la Literatura
Peruana, 2019, http://www.casadelaliteratura.gob.pe/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/
antologia_lit_amazonica_digital.pdf.
van der Deijl, Lucas, et al. “The Canon of Dutch Literature According to Google.” Journal of
Cultural Analytics, vol. 4, no. 2, 2019. Crossref, doi:10.22148/16.046.
“Wikipedia: Notability (People).” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Notability_(people). Accessed 25 Feb. 2022.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

