Conroy, Melanie. “Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata.”
Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 8, no. 2, May 2023, doi:10.22148/001c.74068.

ARTICLE

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata
Melanie Conroy1
1 University of Memphis

Keywords: gender gap, Wikidata, French writers, data-driven literary history
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.74068

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 8, Issue 2, 2023

One of the recurring questions of world literary history is how to ensure that
marginalized writers are represented. The advent of a data-driven literary history
has made this question even more pressing, as collaborative and distributed
projects like Wikidata have been shown to exhibit large gaps between groups,
despite the diversity of topics and contributors represented. In order to get an
idea of how entrenched the gender gap is within literary Wikidata, I will examine
the representation of male writers versus writers who are women or other genders
using Wikidata. Since the data are vast and complex, I will particularly focus on
the subset that is related to French and Francophone writers in Wikidata with an
eye to how the gender gap evolves across nations, geography, and time. I will show
that the gender gap is less significant in recent periods and in smaller Wikidata
communities and that the largest Wikidata communities with the longest
histories have larger gender gaps. As in other subject fields, literary topics in
Wikidata are disproportionately linked to male authors. Finally, I consider some
ways that the gender gap intersects with linguistic justice movements and how the
gender gap can be reduced in literary Wikidata. The patterns in the data and
procedure may be generalizable to literary Wikidata as a whole, especially larger
Wikidata communities, because the gender gap in both the French and the
Francophone subsets of the data is close to the global average; there is also a
higher-than-average representation of writers of other genders that resembles
other large Wikidata communities.

Gender bias in literary history is a fascinating problem because there are so
many potential confounding variables: gaps in the publication record,
differences in how many people of different genders wrote and published, and
cultural differences, to name but a few.1 Feminists have long challenged the
masculinist literary history that would claim that women’s texts have often
been excluded from literary canons due to poor quality. Far from a
retrospective activist intervention by modern feminists, this critique of literary
history’s focus on male writers is present in literary history, as well as in
women’s writing from the medieval to early modern period. In their
introduction to A History of Feminist Literary Criticism, editors Gill Plain and
Susan Sellers affirm that their subject’s “eventual self-conscious expression was
the culmination of centuries of women’s writing, of women writing about
women writing, and of women—and men—writing about women’s minds,
bodies, art and ideas” (2). Within French literary history specifically, deep biases
against women as literary producers have long been expressed in both literary
works and literary history. Especially before the twentieth century, French

1 Thank you to the participants of Digitizing Enlightenment V, held in Montpellier, France, July 6-8, 2022, for their comments on an early

version of this essay. I also gratefully acknowledge the feedback from the editors of this special issue and my peer reviewer, who encouraged me
to make this essay on the gender gap into a more precise intervention on Wikidata, rather than Wikipedia more broadly.

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

women who claimed to be professional writers or spoke out against
institutional limits on their self-expression were often referred to as “un
homme manqué” or otherwise not feminine. “Once a woman writer decided
to publish any criticism of the patriarchal status quo in early modern France,”
Anne L. Schroder observes, “she risked a humiliating backlash intended to
force her to retreat into silence” (376). But sometimes even women writers
were famous in their own era yet were forgotten soon after. For instance,
writers such as Mme de Genlis and Marie Jeanne Riccoboni were celebrated
in the eighteenth century, but they were, nevertheless, sidelined in later literary
histories. In Riccoboni’s case, this bias was amplified by the world of
publishing, such as the widespread plagiarism of her works; nevertheless, she
achieved “a successful commercial literary venture in Enlightenment France,
where such an undertaking was commonly doomed to fail due to the deeply
ingrained gender bias against women writers,” argues Marijn S. Kaplan, as
well as “the limited legal protection for both authors and publishers from
literary piracy and in defense of textual ownership” (187). Even in the case
of individual known writers, it can, thus, be difficult to untangle gender bias
from other forms of competition and hardship that authors—both male and
female—experienced.
The feminist re-examination of early modern and modern literary history has
often turned up writers like Genlis and Riccoboni who were highly praised at
the time they published but became less so when canons were formed for use in
schools and universities. Women writers of the early modern period, including
Christine de Pisan, one of the earliest French women writers to appear in many
literary histories and the author of The City of Women (La Cité des Dames,
1405), or Mme de La Fayette, author of The Princess of Clèves (La Princesse de
Clèves, 1678), were hardly unknown when they initially published, but they
have seen their reputations rise in recent decades. But some French women
authors were not “published authors” in the same way that authors of books
are. Many more women writers produced handwritten manuscripts, occasional
poetry, or correspondence, rather than braving the publishing industry to
produce books. Despite the many cultural constraints they faced, “[e]arly
modern French women were prolific writers,” as Colette H. Winn stresses, but
“[t]hose who engaged in authorship would simply circulate their manuscripts.
Relatively few of them went so far as to publish their works themselves” (1).
We can, therefore, wonder how many such unpublished, or under-published,
works by women writers exist in the archives. Digital platforms like Wikipedia
present an opportunity to make such under-published writers known.
Indeed, we can ask whether women’s literary history should be written as
a separate history at all, or whether it should be integrated into masculinist
literary history. Christine Planté has explored both options in a recent essay
where she lays out how women’s literary history can be either written into
or written outside of traditional literary histories (Planté 657). Planté insists
on the distinction between history as a series of events—in this case,
Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

publications—and history as a story about those events that is open-ended
and constantly retold by future generations. Open-ended digital projects have
much to offer both open-ended histories and more closed versions of literary
history. In fact, I would argue that data-driven literary history is uniquely good
at toggling between histories written at different scales, since data can be reorganized and curated more easily than textual histories. That said, it should
be noted that the debate around the importance of gender as a category is
particularly contentious in French culture, which has often posed and denied
the centrality of gender as a construct, as Riot-Sarcey, Planté, and Fougeyrollas
argued in their 2003 book Le genre comme catégorie d’analyse: sociologie,
histoire, littérature.
Despite decades of feminist activism to discover and reference more works
by women and people of other genders, the gender gap continues to mark
projects like Wikidata and Wikipedia that rely on established reference works
like Encyclopedia Britannica, the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, or
La Biographie Michaud. Indeed, while far more research has been done on the
gender gap in online encyclopedias like Wikipedia, the gender gap in projects
like Wikidata is remarkably similar to that in more traditional encyclopedias.
There is little doubt that women are under-represented as writers and topics
in French language encyclopedias like Diderot and d’Alembert’s Encyclopédie
Méthodique, where zero out of 140 encyclopédistes were women and topics
tended towards the practical mechanical arts, mathematical, geographical,
botanical, and other highly technical subjects, and controversial topics like
philosophy. That said, less work has been done on encyclopedias that
completely exclude women like the Encyclopédie. There have been, however,
many encyclopedias and encyclopedic projects that included women, at least
to some degree, and even Diderot and d’Alembert’s Encyclopédie participated
in a culture in which women were active. Adeline Gargam notes that a small
number of eighteenth-century French women were permitted to teach science
publicly, one of whom, Marie-Marguerite Biheron, turned her cabinet de
curiosités into “une véritable école au service de l’instruction publique” that
gave lessons in human anatomy to the likes of encyclopédistes Diderot, Grimm,
and d’Alembert (paragraph 11). The lack of written participation in these early
encyclopedic projects is, however, striking.
It is not so easy to say why the gender gap persists in current encyclopedias. Is
it primarily because women have contributed fewer canonical works to world
literature or because their books are now perceived as “less significant” by the
predominantly male Wikidata community? Encyclopedias that “have recently
been subject to programmes of extensive revision and republication” like the
Oxford Dictionary of National Biography and the Oxford English Dictionary
have managed to add more notable women, suggesting that there are still
important stories to be told about women’s publications in early eras (Baigent

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

et al. 13). As we shall see, online and contemporary encyclopedias like
Wikipedia have made some progress in closing the gender gap, but much work
remains to be done.
The gender gap in Wikipedia has been documented by Wikipedians, the
Wikimedia Foundation, and researchers on Wikipedia. For example, the
English-language article “Gender bias on Wikipedia” cites as key evidence for
the gender imbalance within Wikipedia the 2018 Wikimedia Foundation
survey showing that 90% of Wikipedia contributors who responded to the
survey identify as male, as well as the fact that “Wikipedia’s articles about
women are less likely to be included, expanded, neutral, and detailed.” A
similar French-language article, “Biais de genre sur Wikipédia,” raises many of
the same questions, focusing on women’s representation in French Wikipedia
and the 2008 survey that began the Wikimedia inquiry into the demographics
of its users. Emma Paling details how “[s]ome female editors have been the
target of harassment from their male colleagues,” driving them away from the
Wikipedia community.
The gaps in Wikidata have been less explored than those in Wikipedia and
traditional encyclopedias. Given the substantial bias in both traditional literary
history and the Wikidata communities, how can we increase the visibility of
women and gender minorities in Wikidata? Well before the creation of
Wikipedia, there have been attempts to quantify the gender gap and weigh
different possible causes (Saint Martin 52), but Wikipedia and Wikidata
provide us with new data sources to answer these longstanding questions.
While I cannot hope to solve this thorny problem across the entirety of
Wikidata, I would like to propose a method for approximately quantifying
the gap between women’s writing and the representation of women in literary
history through one case study: the representation of French and Francophone
women writers in Wikidata. Hopefully, the ideas presented here can be of
use to literary historians seeking to integrate more high-quality data about
other marginalized groups such as writers who use less common languages,
indigenous writers, or writers from smaller or marginalized countries that have
been inadequately represented in online spaces. In particular, I would like to
examine the ways that women writers are integrated, or not, into Wikidata’s
knowledge graph in ways that contribute to world-historical narratives like
national literatures, periodization, and spatial influence. I will also present
some ways to quickly and efficiently increase literary women’s representation
within Wikidata and, by extension, Wikipedia as a whole, drawing on the
methods of larger projects to monitor the gender gap (Klein et al.). In
particular, I will consider the ways that the linguistic justice movement and
feminist activism within Wikidata interrelate and how they influence the
representation of literary history in Wikipedia.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

Wikipedia has become an increasingly data-heavy resource. “Originally
conceived in 2001 as a mainly text-based resource, Wikipedia has collected
increasing amounts of structured data, including numbers, dates, coordinates,
and many types of relationships, from family trees to the taxonomy of species”
(Vrandečić and Krötzsch 78). Wikidata itself is a large knowledge repository
of links and statements describing an item, often ascribing a property to it.
Wikidata
is
accessible
through
the
Wikidata
website
(https://www.wikidata.org/)
or
the
Wikidata
query
service
(https://query.wikidata.org/). Wikidata contains a lot of information about the
lives of people that can be used for historical research, with enough knowledge
of how the historicity of topics was arrived at. Wikidata is not a part of
Wikipedia; rather, as explained on its main page, Wikidata “acts as central
storage for the structured data of its Wikimedia sister projects including
Wikipedia, Wikivoyage, Wiktionary, Wikisource, and others” (“Main Page”).
Not all of the items in Wikidata have an associated Wikipedia or other
Wikimedia page, but they almost always appear on one (for example as a
relative or colleague of a more famous individual). The Wikidata stats as of
August 2022 are 9,670,744 “humans,” 3,954,304 of which have an associated
page, 674,283 of which are labelled as “female,” 3,113,838 are labelled as
“male,” and 1,604 as “other.” 164,579 “humans” with an associated Wikipedia
link do not have a gender assigned. Of the articles or topics for unknown or
non-binary “humans” it is hard to draw many conclusions. The small number
of articles on “other” or non-binary subjects (1,604) are, on average, more
recent, longer, and higher quality than the larger number of articles on subjects
of “unknown” gender (164,579), but that may be a correlation based on poor
documentation that could be resolved through further research.
What constitutes the gender gap in Wikidata? Regarding Wikipedia, the
gender gap in the online encyclopedia’s authorship, topics, and readership has
been well documented in the sciences, the arts, and general culture since the
site’s origin in 2001 (Konieczny and Klein 4608–10). For the most part, these
disparities persist in Wikidata, despite the fact that the Wikimedia Foundation
has documented the problem in surveys and organized hack-a-thons and other
events aimed at reducing the gender gap in Wikipedia since 2008. These
disparities exist in every major language and across a range of levels from 1) the
gender of Wikipedians worldwide (around 90% of whom identify as male), 2)
participation in editing and leadership roles, 3) the gap in number of entries
(both of biographical articles and Wikidata topics labelled “human”), 4) length
of biographical articles which are longer and more likely to be high quality for
male subjects than for women, and 5) within the topics of non-biographical
articles where “male-coded” topics are more often explored than “femininecoded” topics. Gender gaps have been documented in the creation of
Wikipedia biography pages (Graells-Garrido et al. 165–67); researchers have
shown that women’s biographies are more likely to be deleted due to perceived
lesser notability (Tripodi), and the women’s biographies that remain in
Wikipedia are actually more notable due to deletions (Wagner et al. 2–3). There
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

is some debate about whether the lack of representation of women among
Wikipedia’s editors is a cause of excess deletions of women’s biographies, or
whether the bias is found in underlying works and databases that serve as
sources. Whatever the causes, the lack of biographical articles about women
reduces the data that can be extracted to Wikidata either automatically or by
users.
At the most basic level, the gender gap that interests me here is the difference
between the number of women, men, and people of other genders who appear
in the Wikidata knowledge graph as item with the statement “instance of
‘human.’” In other words, I am only going to deal with these inequalities
at the level of prosopography, or the quantification of individuals and their
traits. Computational approaches, such as attempts to distinguish between
men’s and women’s styles in a large number of texts and to define an “écriture
feminine” (Olsen 147–48), have been fruitful. Here I am concerned with a
rather more mundane question: “how many women writers appear in
Wikidata?”. Currently, there are more than nine million items purported to
be “human” across all languages in Wikidata. Of these, almost four million
have an associated sitelink; more than three million of them are “male” and
around 675,000 are “female.” This is the main gender gap that I would like to
explore. Wikidata items that have a sitelink are a good proxy for people who
are considered notable enough to have their own Wikipedia page or Wikisource
link since the sitelink is an internal link that often corresponds to a Wikipedia
page; for example, the Wikidata item “Lou Andreas-Salomé (Q38873)” has 61
sitelinks, of which 54 are sitelinks to Wikipedia pages in various languages,
four are to Wikiquote pages, and two are to Wikisource pages. I will also refer
to people of “other genders,” as Wikipedia classifies trans, non-binary, and
other gender minorities, but that data is far more spotty and my conclusions
are limited. Fewer than 2,000 people in Wikidata with a sitelink are currently
assigned the gender “other,” although this group is growing and no doubt
under-researched and under-documented, appearing mostly in the most recent
decades.

1. Wikidata as a source for literary history
Wikipedia users regularly encounter the sort of information contained in
Wikidata in the form of the infobox on many Wikipedia pages. Whether
generated from Wikidata or created independently, the infobox often displays
a condensed version of the information in Wikidata itself, notably the person’s
name (called a “label”), a short description of the person, normally providing
the person’s nationality and occupation, and sometimes aliases. The rest of
the box displays the statements about the person in a tabular format. For
people, this box often contains the birth name, the birthday, birthplace, day of
death and place of death. It also frequently contains a list of family members,
such as spouse(s), children, parents, and other relatives. For writers, it often
contains an occupation, such as “writer,” “poet,” “playwright” or “novelist.”
The infobox can also display statements about political affiliations, religion,
Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

other jobs and roles, associates, influences, works, a signature, and tens of
other possible topics across all of Wikipedia. It is important to note that the
arrangement and display of information are highly variable across languages
as well as among pages in the same language; the infobox is not automatically
generated from Wikipedia, but rather an act of curation that each Wikipedia
project has undertaken.
What may be less obvious to the general reader is that Wikipedia pages
themselves vary in quality and depth across languages. Users who only interact
with pages within one language community may not realize which types of
information are present or could be added, either to Wikipedia pages or to
Wikidata, because that community does not commonly use that information
category. And, of course, Wikidata pages display far more information than
the infobox, sometimes even information that is missing or incorrect in the
infobox. That said, the extent of complete information in Wikidata often
provides clues to the importance of a person to posterity for particular groups,
whether they be linguistic communities, national ones, or somewhere in
between. This is because individuals who have one fairly complete Wikipedia
page—in French, for instance—may have stubs or very low quality pages in
other languages. The “missing” data is much more apparent in Wikidata
because the entire knowledge structure is displayed on a single page.
As Wikidata’s introduction page explains, an item in Wikidata, including a
person, is given a unique identifier, which is usually linked to a name; for
example, the nineteenth-century French novelist George Sand (1804-1876) has
the unique identifier “Q3816,” which is also linked to other versions of the
writer’s name—“George Sand,” “Lucile Aurore Dupin,” and 14 other versions
of her name or pseudonym, including common misspellings and versions of
her pseudonym in non-Roman alphabets. By connecting these versions of a
name via a unique identifier, Wikidata links not only the different versions of
a person’s name but also the various Wikipedia and other Wikisource pages
that use those names. Via Wikidata, it is possible to see that the “Жорж Санд”
[George Sand] in Russian Wikipedia is the same as “乔治·桑” [George Sand]
or “阿曼蒂娜-露西-奥萝尔·杜班” [Amantine-Aurore-Lucile Dupin] in
Chinese-language Wikipedias; all of these refer to the same person as the
“Baroness Dudevant” (Sand’s married name) in English or the French
“Amantine-Aurore-Lucile Dupin” (her birth name). George Sand’s name
appears in Arabic, Belarusian, Central Kurdish, Persian, Russian, multiple
versions of Chinese, and other languages with non-Roman scripts. Sand also
has a large number of names under English, French, and other languages in the
“also known as” values. Indeed, Wikidata records 74 Wikipedia pages in various
languages that are associated with her, as well as many unique identifiers for
library databases around the world that are linked to her profile, Wikiquote
pages in 32 languages, and Wikisource pages in twelve. The disparity between

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

the number of languages in which Sand has a biographical page and the
number of languages in which Sand’s works are available is striking and perhaps
indicative of a writer whose works are more talked about than read today.
For less internationally famous writers, such as the French socialite and writer
Delphine de Girardin (1804-1855, Q437094), who wrote at a similar time as
Sand and likewise had many pseudonyms, we find less coverage across different
language Wikipedias and, therefore, fewer versions of the name or sitelinks.
Girardin has a birth name (“Delphine Gay”), a married name (“Mme Émile
de Girardin”), and several pseudonyms (“Vicomte Delaunay,” “Charles de
Launay,” etc.), just as Sand does. Nevertheless, she has far fewer aliases in
different languages, due to the fact that she is not present in nearly as many
Wikipedia projects as George Sand is. She does have a label in many languages
that do not use the Roman alphabet, such as Arabic (" ‫)“ كاتبة فرنسية‬, Bulgarian
(“Делфин дьо Жирарден”), Japanese (”デルフィーヌ・ド・ジラルダ
ン"), Russian (“Дельфина де Жирарден”), Ukrainian (“Дельфіна де
Жирарден”), and several others that transliterate Girardin’s name directly.
But there are fifteen languages in which she does not even have a label. And
Girardin’s pseudonyms only appear in the French and the English descriptions,
suggesting a lack of familiarity with her writing, much of which was published
pseudonymously, in other Wikipedia communities. Wikidata records thirteen
Wikipedia pages in various languages that are associated with Girardin, mostly
in Romance languages, but also in Hebrew, Russian, Arabic, and Ukrainian, as
well as many unique identifiers in library databases, Wikisource pages in four
languages, and Wikiquote pages in four—reflecting, perhaps, less integration
into world literary history, or a lack of translations of her works, or a lack of
interest among digital communities.
Other evidence we can find in Wikidata for the wider distribution of George
Sand’s works than Girardin’s comes in the form of the descriptions that are
attached to the unique identifier. All of the descriptions for Girardin contain
the same phrase translated into various languages: “écrivaine française,”
“French writer,” “französische Dichterin,” etc. This suggests that the
description is a direct translation from a common source and not created
independently by various Wikipedia communities to represent a familiar
subject. The descriptions of George Sand, on the other hand, while not more
numerous, are more varied, from the English “French novelist and memoirist;
pseudonym of Lucile Aurore Dupin,” to the French “romancière et
dramaturge française” [“French novelist and playwright”], to the Finnish
“ranskalainen vallankumouksellinen ja feministinen kirjailija” [“a French
revolutionary and feminist writer”], to the Chinese "法国作家，阿芒蒂娜露西尔-奥萝尔·迪潘的化名” [“the pseudonym of French writer AmantineAurore-Lucile Dupin”]. The descriptions of George Sand refer to different
genres (novel, memoir, theater). The English and the Chinese refer to her use
of a pseudonym, although they use different versions of her real name. A few
of the descriptions erroneously include dates or other information which is
Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

Table 1. Sample Wikidata metrics
Metric

George Sand

D. de Girardin

Clarisse Tremblay

Wikidata sitelinks

121

26

2

Wikiquote links

32

9

0

Wikipedia links

76

13

2

Wikidata statements

336

127

26

* Three examples of Wikidata profiles for Francophone women writers

not supposed to appear in the description. Finally, the Finnish text refers to
her as “a French revolutionary and feminist writer” and several others refer to
her politics. The variation in these descriptions suggests that George Sand’s
biography, if not her works, is of enough interest for users of Wikipedia to
be invested in describing her work and her politics, rather than using direct
translations.
Both Sand and Girardin have attracted enough attention from Wikipedia and
Wikidata editors to garner impressive documentation of their lives and works
across languages. An example of a less complete Wikidata profile describes
the Québécoise poet and journalist Clarisse Tremblay (1951-1999); Tremblay
appears only in the French and English language editions of Wikipedia and has
only four descriptions in Wikidata (in English, French, German, and Dutch)
and no non-Roman script transliterations or translations. Her biography is less
complete and her data appear across fewer Wikidata projects. This pattern of
less complete biographies appearing in fewer Wikidata communities is repeated
in other time periods and for other women writers.
Table 1 shows various metrics that can be used to measure the footprint of
these three writers within the Wikidata ecosystem and how those metrics
correlate to status: the number of sitelinks, links to Wikiquote pages for
different languages, to Wikipedia pages, and the total number of statements.
These numbers reflect the three writers’ disparate statuses: George Sand as
a representative of “world literature” with a global presence, Girardin as a
representative of transnational literature, and Clarisse Tremblay as an example
of a national literary figure (table 1). There are tens of French women writers
with a footprint similar to George Sand’s, hundreds who appear in many
national Wikidata projects like Girardin, and thousands of writers who appear
primarily in one Wikipedia community like Tremblay; indeed, these less
represented writers are the majority and form the “long tail” of the data. Since
they have few Wikipedia pages or sitelinks, writers with fewer links do not
appear in many Wikidata subsets and may not get added to lists and other
parts of Wikipedia that might bring more attention to writers who are less well
known internationally. They have fewer connections and, therefore, do not
appear in as many queries.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

We can, therefore, use Wikipedia and Wikidata as an indicator of the prestige
and influence of an author on contemporary world culture, but with the caveat
that their very centrality to Wikidata may be a factor in how famous they
are. Earlier studies have looked at which authors are the most central to the
page network of Wikipedia and explored how this network centrality might
correspond with international literary prestige for authors like Voltaire, Victor
Hugo, and other prominent figures in world literary history (Hube et al. 28).
Any attempt to transform an author with few connections into a superconnected author like George Sand will encounter numerous impediments in
Wikipedia. These impediments exist to stop Wikidata from being overrun with
hoaxes, spammers, or self-promoters. It may, however, be worth thinking about
minor interventions that we can make to bring more attention to lesser known
writers, using Wikidata as a tool.

2. Searching for patterns: nationality, place, and time
As we have seen, items from Wikidata can be viewed directly on the Wikidata
site as well as in the infobox on some Wikipedia pages in languages like French
and English. They can also be queried via SPARQL or the Wikidata query tool.
The underlying data model for much of Wikidata is triples. Statements assign
values, such as “female,” to items, such as “George Sand.” This simple language
allows for unlimited connections between items.
I will be using Wikidata queries in order to get rough estimates for the number
of women writers in various parts of Wikidata’s knowledge graph. These
numbers will change as Wikidata is updated and may be sensitive to small
changes in the script or terms queried. The scripts have been published to
my “Literary Wikidata” Github repository [https://github.com/mrconroy/
literary-wikidata] so that readers can check my work and see the current results
from the queries. The Wikidata identifiers are “P106: Q36180” for
“occupation: writer” and “P21: Q6581072” for “gender: female.” In order
to specify French as a written language, the property for written language is
“P6886,” while French is “Q150.”
Let’s begin with the broadest picture of women writing in the French language.
Querying Wikidata for “human” with the occupation of “writer” and the
gender “female,” we find that there are 90,352 women writers with a Wikipedia
page. 4,977 of these women writers in Wikipedia are of French nationality.
If we focus on the Wikipedia projects that are most likely to feature French
women writers (French, English, German, Arabic), we find there are 1,626
women in Wikidata who are listed as using French as a written language and
have the occupation “writer.” This compares to 10,970 entries for humans
with the gender “male,” the profession “writer,” and the written language
“French” in Wikidata. Table 2 shows how “George Sand is female” is
represented in Wikidata.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

Table 2. Sample Wikidata statement
Item

Property

Value

Q3816

P21

Q6581072

George Sand

sex or gender

Female

* Wikidata statement: George Sand has the gender female

If we want to display the items labelled “human,” “female,” and “writer” on
a map, we must also filter for items with an associated birth place and then
change the default view to “map.”2 The script for this query (https://w.wiki/
6Laa) appears as follows:
#Map of birth places of French-language women writers
("écrivaines d'expression française")
SELECT DISTINCT ?item ?itemLabel ?placeofbirth ?coord ?dob
WHERE {
?item wdt:P31 wd:Q5.
?item wdt:P21 wd:Q6581072.
?item wdt:P106/wdt:P279* wd:Q36180.
?item wdt:P6886 wd:Q150.
OPTIONAL {?item wdt:P19 ?placeofbirth.
?placeofbirth wdt:P625 ?coord.}
OPTIONAL {?item wdt:P569 ?dob.}
SERVICE wikibase:label
{ bd:serviceParam wikibase:language "fr, ar, en, de".}
}
#defaultView:Map

Figure 1 shows the birth places of all women who are said to have the written
language “French” and the occupation “writer.” There are some duplicates,
notably because some writers have multiple geographical coordinates for their
birth places; many coordinates also represent more than one writer. There are
also many writers missing, due to the fact that many writers do not have a
written language explicitly marked, or even a code in Wikidata. We can see
that Europe, North Africa, and Quebec, where French is a dominant written
language in many countries and regions, are well represented, as are
Francophone countries like Haiti. So, even though we know that this is a
fraction of the total number of women writers of French expression, there is a
reasonable geographical diversity to those who are in the database.
The resulting dataset includes 1,626 women who write or wrote in French,
including a large number of international women writers, such as the
American-born Parisian socialite Natalie Clifford Barney, English-Canadian
Nancy Houston, who writes primarily in French, and Hispanic women who
write in French like Silvina Ocampo. There are also the many Francophone
writers of the former French empire (Magie Faure-Vidot) and former Russian

2 For a step-by-step tutorial on how to create these queries, see Alex Stinson, “Writing a Wikidata Query: Discovering Women Writers from

North Africa” from the WikiIndaba 2018 Conference. The Wikidata identifiers are “wdt:P106 wd:Q36180” for “occupation: writer” and
“ps:P31 wdt:P279” for “gender: female.” In order to specify French as a written language, the property for written language is “P6886.” French
is “Q150.”

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

Figure 1. Map of birth places of women writers who write in French, Data: Wikidata (French, English, Arabic, German).

empire (Eugénie Kapnist). At the same time, we can see that French-speaking
Africa, the home of the majority of Francophones in the world, is extremely
under-represented compared to the number of speakers of the language in that
region, and the regions of North Africa and the Antilles are not particularly
well represented. Of course, people in these regions often speak and write in
other languages, but seeking out individuals born in these regions who write in
French is very likely to uncover many more new writers of French expression.
How representative of French women writers is Wikidata by time period?
Placing these writers on a timeline based on their birth year, we see that the
majority of these women writers with a birth year assigned in Wikipedia were
born after 1800, although estimation and the small number of women writers
born in most years appears to have made the data quite noisy (figure 2).
From this broad sample of women writing in French, we can see that Wikidata
contains a representative sample of Francophone women writers insofar as
there are representatives of all major Francophone countries and even of
women from countries that are not traditionally or officially Francophone. It
is also representative insofar as there are women writers from various periods,
especially those born after 1800. The coverage is far spottier before 1800 and it
is worth asking whether there are significant writers missed during those earlier
periods, especially between 1500 and 1800 when French is fully established as
a language of written work.
Feminist literary histories have given us a number of periods to examine for
evidence of a rise in the number of women writers: the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries in conjunction with the rise of the French novel and
new opportunities for promotion in the salons or private theaters; the early
nineteenth-century sentimentalist wave; the late nineteenth-century rise of
Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

Figure 2. Timeline of birth years of women writers who write in French, Data: Wikidata (French, English, Arabic, German).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

women’s magazines; the avant-garde movements during and between the two
world wars. Indeed, we can see in Figure 2 a bump at each of these times,
particularly at the beginning of the nineteenth century and again in the
twentieth century. Keeping in mind that many of the writers who were born
after 1980 may not have become active yet or may not yet have experienced
wide acclaim, the broad picture remains a slow rise in women writing as a
profession. It is important to remember that this rise in both the number and
proportion of women writers occurs as people outside the gender binary are
also rising. The timeline suggests that the literary community has gotten better
at integrating people of diverse genders over time, or that Wikidata becomes
more inclusive during later periods, or perhaps some combination of the two.

3. The French gender gap compared to other nationalities’
How does France’s gender gap compare to other countries’? As of 2022, the
global gender gap in Wikipedia sitelinks was 82% men / 18% women with
0.042% people of other genders. The gender gap in French Wikipedia sitelinks
was slightly higher than average at 85% men / 15% women. Being close to the
average, France sits around the middle of the distribution of larger countries
in terms of its gender gap and the distribution of the gender gap over time.
Canada has the smallest total gap at 35% women / 65% men, 0.2% other
gender, among writers of that nationality. The gender gap for articles with the
profession of “writer” and French nationality is virtually identical to the global
average for the website (82% / 18%). Countries that have a small gender gap
in Wikipedia links include Finland, Norway, the United States, Sweden, the
United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. These countries are disproportionately
wealthy countries of the global North, whether English-speaking or not. We
cannot, therefore, entirely dismiss the possibility that wealth is correlated with
the capacity to pursue gender equity.
Nevertheless, we can see patterns other than the impact of national wealth.
Three other patterns arise in the data when looking at the proportion of
women writers by nationality. One is that smaller Wikipedia communities, like
those for Norwegian, Welsh, and Haitian Creole, often have a smaller gender
gap than communities like the English or French Wikipedia. Haitian Creole
Wikipedia has a particularly high percentage of women writers represented at
24%. The second pattern is that some countries with long histories of writing,
notably Italy, often have the largest gender gaps; indeed, of all major Wikipedia
communities Italian Wikipedia has the largest gender gap (at 10% women, 90%
men, 0.03% other), as well as some of the best coverage of earlier centuries. For
this reason, it is important to bear in mind change or improvement in gender
balance over time. A Wikipedia or Wikidata community might have a very large
gender gap when viewed as a whole, but much less so with regard to the slice
representing the present day. Finally, the number and proportion of women
and non-binary writers rise in all major communities over time. This suggests
that Wikipedia as a whole is becoming more inclusive of gender identities, and
with it, Wikidata is becoming more inclusive as well.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

Figure 3. Bar chart of French (citizen) writers by gender (women, men, and people of other genders) by decade.
Data: Wikidata.

4. The French gender gap over time
If we visualize the raw number of biographies for writers of various genders
(women, men, and other genders) by decade (figure 3), we see that the number
of French women writers has mostly increased, albeit unevenly, up until the
1980s, when it approaches parity (49% women / 51% men).
While gender parity in articles has been reached for those born in the 1980s
(later generations are too small for statistical analysis), the rise of women writers
as subjects of Wikipedia biographies across history has been slow and uneven.
From the birth cohort of the 1800s to that of the 1880s, the percentage of
Wikipedia biographies dedicated to women varies between five percent and
eleven percent. The average percentage climbs substantially after that but stays
below 20% until the birth cohort of the 1940s. The rise to near parity in the
birth cohort of the 1980s is substantial, but we should remember that fewer
people born in the 1980s have assigned occupations in Wikipedia. This gender
gap is consistent with the global pattern within Wikipedia by birth cohort. We
should note, as well, that people of other genders are featured more as time goes
on but remain a small proportion of biographies of French writers. That said,
French Wikipedia has one of the highest numbers of people of other genders
(487), 113 of whom are writers, and 9 of whom are French citizens.
Aside from the gender gap, there are significant cultural and linguistic gaps
in how much various demographic groups contribute to Wikipedia, with the
English-language edition dominating non-English languages in the number
and completeness of articles, a gap which means that the English-language
edition often serves as a model for articles in other languages and strongly
Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

influences how topics are covered or even deemed worthy of inclusion at all.
This gap is not strictly related to the number of speakers of a language, since,
for example, Chinese has a relatively small Wikipedia community and more
than a billion worldwide speakers. This language bias matters, even if many
native speakers of other languages use Wikipedia in English. Just as in the
authorship and editing process, there are gender and cultural differences in
who reads Wikipedia and how they read it: female readers and minor language
groups are less represented, leading to further alienation from the Wikipedia
community. Similarly, people and works with their own Wikipedia pages are
perceived as more prominent or historically significant, despite the disparities
in gender, culture, and language that have been documented through the
encyclopedia and among Wikipedians. These documented inequities have led
researchers like Julie McDonough Dolmaya to call for “linguistic justice” by
closing some of the gaps in representation, rather than merely documenting
them.
One aspect of Wikipedia that has held back progress in gender and linguistic
justice is the concept of “notability.” In order for a person to be declared
“notable,” he or she needs to be referenced in a third-party document, usually
a paper encyclopedia or external verified database, such as a national or
international dictionary of biography. Otherwise, a person can be considered
“notable” by winning a prize or achieving “a widely recognized contribution.”
Here are the criteria for notability from external sources:
1. The person has received a well-known and significant award or honor,
or has been nominated for such an award several times; or
2. The person has made a widely recognized contribution that is part of
the enduring historical record in a specific field; or
3. The person has an entry in a country’s standard national biographical
dictionary (e.g. the Dictionary of National Biography).
The notability rule is a good one insofar as it prevents commercial or
government interests from passing off press releases as documents verifying
the importance of people who may not be of genuine interest to either the
Wikipedia community or casual users of the site. Likewise, the rule has benefits
in that it asks for external confirmation of the importance of a person to a field,
effectively outsourcing the verification to external arbiters. But if these arbiters
are themselves biased, as prize competitions and dictionaries of national
biography have been in the past, such a rule risks replicating ingrained gender
inequities. For this reason, considering option 3, it may be that the creation of
external biographies and the linking of that data to Wikidata is the best method
for quickly and cheaply removing bias from Wikidata.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

5. Previous attempts to reduce the gender gap
“[O]nly 12.64% of contributors are female,” according to the 2010 Wikipedia
user survey, the first to thoroughly document the predominance of men among
contributors and editors (Glott et al. 1171). Most previous research on gender
and Wikipedia has focused on Wikipedia articles, rather than Wikidata items,
but many of the same quantitative patterns exist across both projects, not
least because a large number of Wikidata sitelinks are to Wikipedia articles.
Later research on the gender gap in Wikipedia and Wikidata has more often
analyzed data from Wikipedia or Wikidata, rather than conducting surveys
of site users; for example, a 2011 presentation by Zhang and Terveen found
that gender disparities persist in Wikidata (Zhang and Terveen). Wikipedia and
Wikidata have both made efforts to reduce the gender gap that is persistent
when Wikipedians create and structure content without combating bias.
Wikipedia’s active contributors are younger, more male, wealthier, and more
interested in technology and adjacent topics than is the general public. In
general culture, this has meant that contemporary topics, such as popular
video games, consumer technology and devices, or science fiction television
shows that are currently on air, get more coverage than older cultural artefacts
or subjects that are less linked to computer technology, such as knitting or
cooking. Within Wikidata, topics popular with young tech-positive men in the
global north receive far more attention than topics that are popular with older
populations, populations with less access to computers, or that are feminized.
In order to overcome these common biases of internet projects, editors must
make an effort to include topics related to people who do not resemble the
Wikipedia contributors in gender, race, age, and cultural background.
Within literary topics, this preference for the new and technological has meant
that popular literature and science fiction are over-represented, compared to
classical literature. There is also some evidence that novels and graphic novels
that have popular Hollywood movies derived from their intellectual property
or have been adapted for mass consumption feature more promimently than
books that have not. “[F]ans of pop culture are among the most enthusiastic
of Wikipedia’s editors,” Paul Thomas asserts, because Wikipedia allows editors
to create their own paratext whose usage by the general public “is a form of
implicit approval that affirms the editors’ knowledge and encourages them to
make more edits” (1). Older works and literary works with a smaller popular
culture footprint tend to have shorter, less detailed articles, and fewer sitelinks.
While not authoritative, Wikipedia metrics can be used to gauge the popularity
or canonicity of literary authors and works, notably within the same school or
tradition (Blakesley 433–35). It is important to keep in mind the way that these
metrics differ according to historical period, genre, and language. For example,
medieval poetry may be less represented within Wikidata than contemporary
novels when authors are considered. Similarly, poets may appear to have fewer

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

works to their names if the poems are listed as parts of collections, rather than
as individual texts. Nevertheless, such metrics can be useful within a wellconstructed set of authors or texts where such issues are understood.
Historical genres of literature that are not currently dominant in popular
culture get less treatment in online encyclopedias than they would in top-down
encyclopedias. A top-down editor-driven approach to encyclopedia creation
and editing is not, however, the only way to deal with gender gaps. Another
approach is to educate the contributors and editors about the gaps that exist
and to encourage them to create solutions. This is the approach that the
Wikipedia community and Wikipedia have taken. By organizing conferences,
discussions, and online forums, members of the Wikipedia community,
including the founder Jimmy Wales, have drawn attention to the presentist
nature of Wikipedia, the tendency to focus on so-called “cult” topics with
strong online audiences, and the concomitant tendency to ignore traditional
cultural topics that top-down encyclopedias cover more completely, including
women’s literature.
Equity-driven projects have succeeded in reducing the gender gap, especially in
smaller Wikipedia communities such as Haitian Creole and the Scandinavian
countries. The fact that smaller and non-Western Wikipedia and Wikidata
communities have often reduced the gender gap more than communities of
the global north or majority white countries is an interesting phenomenon
that deserves further study. In Wikidata, not only are men over-represented
compared to other genders but there is also an over-representation of white
individuals and citizens of countries in Europe and North America; people
of other races and nationalities are under-represented in comparison to their
share of the world’s population (Shaik et al. 6). Nevertheless, many smaller and
majority non-white communities are reducing the gender gap more quickly
than larger ones. China and South Korea (both 30% female) have also reduced
their gender gap. Larger Wikipedia projects like French have no doubt made
progress but not as dramatically as these others have. The United States and
France still have a high gender gap, as do other large countries like India, the
United Kingdom, and Spain, all with large Wikipedia projects. As we have seen,
there is a non-linear relationship between gender equity and linguistic justice.
Increasing the presence of under-represented languages does not automatically
reduce the gender gap. Indeed, it seems to be in the articles on the most recent
topics that gender parity is being approached in both larger and smaller
Wikipedia communities like Israel’s or Norway’s. The smaller gender gap in
these communities is a testament to their efforts to represent women and
gender minorities either in Wikipedia or in their online culture more generally.
Increasingly, this approach is taken within Wikidata too.
One of the most active Wikipedia gender equity projects is the WikiProject
Women in Red (Q23875215). Women in Red has been working for a decade
on creating higher quality Wikipedia articles about women, using the

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

Wikipedia quality ranking system to identify biographical articles about
women of different grades: high quality, stubs, A, B, C quality, etc. They also
track the number of sitelinks that are being produced in specific categories
so that users can identify categories with many “stubs,” short or low quality
articles that could be expanded or for which the quality could be improved.
Hack-a-thons and group projects have been created to address the lack of
content about historical figures who are gender minorities, women in STEM,
women authors, women artists, and others. One such project is Mairely
Lemus-Rojas’s to increase the representation of women artists, specifically in
modern and contemporary art (Lemus-Rojas). Saundra Fauconnier has also
published an online tutorial for this purpose through the Wikimedia
Foundation called “Making women more visible online—with Wikidata
tools!” (Fauconnier).
Women in Red and related groups have also been working to reduce the gender
gap in Wikidata. The WikiProject Women is spearheading a large Wikidata
effort “to get every item about a woman described properly on Wikidata.”
Their interest is in the quality as well as the quantity of the items related
to women, such as sitelinks to articles on books, art works, and historical
events. There has also been work done to improve data related to the visual
representation of women through Wikimedia links to images related to
biographical articles, which tend to be less numerous for biographies of
women; these Wikimedia and WikiCommons projects impact the number
of sitelinks and other data related to women available in Wikidata. Images
provide another interesting example of the gender gap with fewer images of
higher average quality attached to women’s biographies, compared with men’s
biographies (Beytía et al. 11), suggesting that more lower-quality images may be
available to link to women’s biographical pages or that some potential sitelinks
may be missing.
One model for how to integrate data related to literary women into Wikidata
comes from the Women Writers Project at the Huygens Institute for Dutch
History in the Netherlands, led by Suzan van Dijk. The Women Writers Project
has an online database and a large amount of documentation of their previous
activities available online (van Dijk). Their Wikidata project page (P2533)
shows data that they have made available. By adding their data to Wikidata,
they have made it visible in the Wikidata query service, making it instantly
available to millions of Wikipedia users, while maintaining control over their
unique identifiers. You can see the list of French women writers in Frenchlanguage Wikidata with a Women Writers ID and birth and death years using
this query (https://w.wiki/6LaZ.):
SELECT DISTINCT ?author ?authorLabel {
?author wdt:P2533 ?wid;
wdt:P21 wd:Q6581072;
wdt:P27 wd:Q142;
wdt:P569 ?birth;

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

wdt:P570 ?death;
SERVICE wikibase:label { bd:serviceParam
wikibase:language "fr".}}

By using such a system, academic authors can increase the gender
representation in Wikidata, by adding curated datasets. Further, if the data
linked to from Wikidata are genuinely third-party, are properly sourced, and
do not bear conflicts of interest, then the existence of a third-party, properly
sourced database with links to proof can actually help meet the Wikipedia
criteria for notability.3
Since producing and integrating data into the knowledge graph is timeconsuming, many in the Wikidata community have been turning to bots and
other ways to automate data extraction and curation. Indeed, Wikidata is
increasingly edited by bots rather than humans and data points may never be
checked over by a human user. As early as 2014, Wikipedia and Wikidata were
edited by “about 50% bots and by about 23% anonymous users,” meaning
that little more than a quarter of the content may be checked by editors, or
even humans (Steiner 1). In 2014, these bots were far more likely to edit large
Wikipedias like English and French, and most bots were active in 5 or fewer
languages; many smaller languages had fewer than 10 active bots, so the use of
bots is highly variable across languages (Steiner 4–5). The use of bots has only
increased since that time and bots now produce so much Wikidata content
that, according to a more recent pre-print study, “most of this content is likely
to be never seen” nor “checked by any human user. With more than 45M
entities in the graph, large swathes of it may be never consulted by anyone”
(Piscopo 3).
The use of bots to create data that may or may not be consulted by humans
is only one of the aspects of automated editing that has been ethically
controversial. A related issue is that bots and mass edits often rely upon strong
assumptions about gender that can be made based on partial biographical
information, or even on the basis of names alone, with no cited sources, to
generate a value for “P21” (Lindsey et al. 5–7). That said, the use of bots is
essential to complete routine tasks that humans are reluctant or unwilling to
do, such as extracting data from Wikipedia for use in the Wikidata knowledge
graph; indeed, using supervised bots is one way to solve the lack of humanreadable labels in “multilingual labels in particular” (Kaffee et al. 1).

3 Another large project that has a presence on Wikidata but is not yet fully integrated into Wikidata is the Women Writers Project led by Julia

Flanders at Northeastern University (Q8031351). The Women Writers Project has an online database and a large amount of documentation of
their previous activities available online; for more information, see their website [https://www.wwp.northeastern.edu].

Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

6. Recommendations for reducing the gender gap
So how can we reduce the gender gap in larger Wikidata projects that shape our
online access to the data of world literary history? Here are some easy, low-cost
ways for digital humanists to reduce the gender gap in Wikidata:
• Advocating for the “notability” of under-documented writers, such
as women and gender minorities, in both articles and data projects.
Without the inclusion of more women in databases and biographical
dictionaries, fewer articles will be created and the notability problem
will persist in Wikimedia and Wikisource projects.
• If you have a dataset with a large number of women or nonbinary
writers, consider adding those individuals directly to Wikidata,
whether or not your project has a separate web repository, so that
others can query Wikidata to retrieve information.
• We can use machine translation to do “first drafts” of Wikidata, such
as transliteration into non-Roman scripts and the creation of short
statements based on identity categories, in order to make marginalized
writers appear as writers across Wikidata languages and communities.
In particular, it is possible to create—computationally and/or in
bulk—short biographies of writers who appear in Wikidata from
statements about writers. Once these are visible to users and editors,
they can be corrected or modified by native or near-native speakers.
• For those whose work focuses on writers who are women or gender
minorities, consider adding attributes to the items associated with
them in Wikidata so that they appear in lists or can be queried. For
example, adding Francophone writers from non-Francophone
countries or countries where French is no longer an official language,
as well as other languages that the person speaks or writes, can make
that person visible in queries from researchers interested in all of
those topics. Writers like George Sand from dominant countries and
languages benefit from this effect already, but writers who are
principally known in “peripheral” literary communities that are
denied exposure within the global context need an extra push to make
them more broadly discoverable.
This article is, thus, in part a call for literary historians who work on
marginalized groups to consider adding their data to Wikidata in the interests
of greater equity. Scholars have often described Wikipedia and Wikidata as
unequitable but have less often intervened to improve inclusivity and the
notability of marginalized writers. By completing these (sometimes laborious)
data tasks, we can improve both the quality and the representativeness of
Wikidata. Working within Wikidata, or adding curated and sourced data from
another project, in many ways goes against academic notions of research credit.
Yet if the data collected is tracked as the Women Writers project/database has
Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

done, then academic reputations can be built and quality can be monitored
in ways that are consistent with academic research expectations. As an
international project that includes people from all regions and all identity
groups to some degree, Wikipedia has brought readers and critics of all kinds
into conversation. Although that conversation has not always been totally
equitable, the community has the tools and the proven creativity to resolve
issues of equity.
Data Repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/5PERE3
Peer reviewer: Sandra Folie (University of Jena)
Submitted: June 01, 2022 EDT, Accepted: June 21, 2022 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

references
Baigent, Elizabeth, et al. “Gender in the Archive: Women in the Oxford Dictionary of National
Biography and the Oxford English Dictionary.” Archives: The Journal of the British Records
Association, vol. 30, 2005, pp. 13–35, doi:10.3828/archives.2005.2.
Beytía, Pablo, et al. “Visual Gender Biases in Wikipedia: A Systematic Evaluation Across the Ten Most
Spoken Languages.” Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media,
vol. 16, 2022, doi:10.31235/osf.io/59rey.
Blakesley, Jacob. “World Literature According to Wikipedia Popularity and Book Translations: The
Case of Modern Italian Poets.” Comparative Critical Studies, vol. 17, no. 3, Oct. 2020, pp. 433–58,
doi:10.3366/ccs.2020.0373.
“Clarisse Tremblay.” Wikidata, http://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q2975638.
Conroy, Melanie. “Literary Wikidata.” Github Repository, http://github.com/mrconroy/literarywikidata. Accessed 21 Aug. 2022.
Fauconnier, Saundra. “Making Women More Visible Online—With Wikidata Tools!” Wikimedia
Foundation, 2018, https://diff.wikimedia.org/2018/03/29/increasing-visibility-women-withwikidata/.
Flanders, Julia, et al. Women Writers Project. http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu.
Gargam, Adeline. “Savoirs mondains, savoirs savants : les femmes et leurs cabinets de curiosités au
siècle des Lumières.” Genre histoire, vol. 5, no. 5, Nov. 2009, doi:10.4000/genrehistoire.899.
“Gender Bias on Wikipedia.” Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gender_bias_on_Wikipedia.
Accessed 21 Aug. 2022.
“George Sand.” Wikidata, http://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q3816. Accessed 21 Aug. 2022.
Glott, Ruediger, et al. “Wikipedia Survey– Overview of Result.” United Nations University:
Collaborative Creativity Group, vol. 8, 2010, pp. 1158-1178, https://tinyurl.com/
WikipediaUNStudy.
Graells-Garrido, Eduardo, et al. “First Women, Second Sex: Gender Bias in Wikipedia.” Proceedings of
the 26th ACM Conference on Hypertext Social Media, 2015, doi:10.1145/2700171.2791036.
Hube, Christoph, et al. “World Literature According to Wikipedia: Introduction to a DBpedia-Based
Framework.” arXiv Preprint, 2017, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1701.00991.pdf.
“Introduction.” Wikidata, http://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Introduction.
Kaffee, Lucie-Aimée, et al. “When Humans and Machines Collaborate: Cross-Lingual Label Editing
in Wikidata.” Proceedings of the 15th International Symposium on Open Collaboration, Aug. 2019,
doi:10.1145/3306446.3340826.
Kaplan, Marijn S. “Publication, Authorship, and Ownership in Marie Jeanne Riccoboni.” The French
Review, vol. 88, no. 1, 2014, pp. 179–91, doi:10.1353/tfr.2014.0115.
Klein, Maximilian, et al. “Monitoring the Gender Gap with Wikidata Human Gender Indicators.”
Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Open Collaboration, 2016, doi:10.1145/
2957792.2957798.
Konieczny, Piotr, and Maximilian Klein. “Gender Gap through Time and Space: A Journey through
Wikipedia Biographies via the Wikidata Human Gender Indicator.” New Media & Society, vol. 20,
no. 12, June 2018, pp. 4608–33, doi:10.1177/1461444818779080.
Lemus-Rojas, Mairely. “Contributing to the Representation of Women Artists in Wikidata.”
Museum Computer Network Conference, 2019, https://hdl.handle.net/1805/21402.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

Lindsey, Nerissa, et al. “Ethical Considerations of Including Gender Information in Open Knowledge
Platforms.” KULA: Knowledge Creation, Dissemination, and Preservation Studies, vol. 6, no. 3, July
2022, pp. 1–15, doi:10.18357/kula.228.
“Main Page.” Wikidata, http://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:Main_Page.
Olsen, M. “Écriture féminine: Searching for an Indefinable Practice?” Literary and Linguistic
Computing, vol. 20, no. Suppl 1, Jan. 2005, pp. 147–64, doi:10.1093/llc/fqi020.
Paling, Emma. “Wikipedia’s Hostility to Women.” The Atlantic, Oct. 2015,
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/10/how-wikipedia-is-hostile-to-women/
411619/.
Piscopo, Alessandro. “Wikidata: A New Paradigm of Human-Bot Collaboration?” arXiv Preprint,
2018, doi:10.48550/arXiv.1810.00931.
Plain, Gill, and Susan Sellers, editors. A History of Feminist Literary Criticism. Cambridge University
Press, 2007.
Planté, Christine. “La place des femmes dans l’histoire littéraire: annexe, ou point de départ d’une
relecture critique?” Revue d’histoire littéraire de la France, vol. 103, no. 3, 2003, pp. 655–68,
http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-00986581/.
Riot-Sarcey, Michèle, et al. Le genre comme catégorie d’analyse. Sociologie, histoire, littérature.
L’Harmattan, 2003, doi:10.2307/3654973.
Saint Martin, Monique de. “Les ‘femmes écrivains’ et le champ littéraire.” Actes de la recherche en
sciences sociales, vol. 83, no. 1, 1990, pp. 52–56, http://www.persee.fr/doc/
arss_0335-5322_1990_num_83_1_2936.
Schroder, Anne L. “Going Public against the Academy in 1784: Mme de Genlis Speaks Out on
Gender Bias.” Eighteenth-Century Studies, vol. 32, no. 3, 1999, pp. 376–82, doi:10.1353/
ecs.1999.0023.
Shaik, Zaina, et al. Analyzing Race and Country of Citizenship Bias in Wikidata. arXiv, 2021,
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2108.05412.
Steiner, Thomas. “Bots vs. Wikipedians, Anons vs. Logged-Ins (Redux) a Global Study of Edit
Activity on Wikipedia and Wikidata.” Proceedings of The International Symposium on Open
Collaboration, Aug. 2014, pp. 1–7, doi:10.1145/2641580.2641613.
Stinson, Alex. “Writing a Wikidata Query: Discovering Women Writers from North Africa.”
WikiIndaba 2018 Conference, Medium.Com, 2018, https://tinyurl.com/northafricanwomen.
Thomas, Paul. “Wikipedia and Participatory Culture: Why Fans Edit.” Transformative Works and
Cultures, vol. 22, Sept. 2016, doi:10.3983/twc.2016.0902.
Tripodi, Francesca. “Ms. Categorized: Gender, Notability, and Inequality on Wikipedia.” New Media
& Society, June 2021, p. 146144482110237, doi:10.1177/14614448211023772.
Vrandečić, Denny, and Markus Krötzsch. “Wikidata: A Free Collaborative Knowledgebase.”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 57, no. 10, Sept. 2014, pp. 78–85, doi:10.1145/2629489.
Wagner, Claudia, et al. “Women through the Glass Ceiling: Gender Asymmetries in Wikipedia.” EPJ
Data Science, vol. 5, no. 1, Mar. 2016, pp. 1–24, doi:10.1140/epjds/s13688-016-0066-4.
Wikidata Query Service. https://query.wikidata.org. Accessed 15 Mar. 2022.
“WikiProject Women.” Wikidata, http://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Wikidata:WikiProject_Women.
Accessed 17 July 2022.
“WikiProject Women in Red.” Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:WikiProject_Women_in_Red. Accessed 17 July 2022.
Winn, Colette H. “Early Modern French Women Writers.” The Palgrave Encyclopedia of Early
Modern Women’s Writing, 2020, pp. 1–9, doi:10.1007/978-3-030-01537-4_1-1.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French Writers’ Wikidata

Zhang, Charles Chuankai, and Loren Terveen. “Quantifying the Gap: A Case Study of Wikidata
Gender Disparities.” 17th International Symposium on Open Collaboration, 2021, doi:10.1145/
3479986.3479992.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

