Fischer, Frank, et al. “Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space.” Journal
of Cultural Analytics, vol. 8, no. 2, May 2023, doi:10.22148/001c.74598.

ARTICLE

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space
Frank Fischer1 , Jacob Blakesley2 , Paula Wojcik3 , Robert Jäschke4
1 Freie Universität Berlin, 2 University of Leeds, 3 Universität Wien, 4 Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin

Keywords: Wikipedia, Wikidata, world literature, canon, digital humanities
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.74598

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 8, Issue 2, 2023

Wikipedia, the world’s largest encyclopedia, and Wikidata, the rapidly growing
knowledge graph, are not yet widely used in literary studies, but their scale and
multilingualism make them particularly suitable as new means for the study of
world literature. This is the hypothesis at the heart of this special issue. Our
preface provides a research overview of the topic, briefly summarizes the articles
that constitute this issue, and focuses on overarching aspects and common
challenges.

New kinds of sources and tools
This special issue on "Wikipedia, Wikidata, and World Literature" revolves
around encyclopedic data and interlinked facts that can provide novel sources
and tools for studying the reception of world literature. It brings together five
contributions that offer new insights into canons and counter-canons, but also
address systematic gaps.
Using Wikipedia and Wikidata as resources allows us to reshape current
scholarship on literary canonicity and popularity, which is too often blinkered
by abstract notions of influence and implicit bias. Despite the longstanding
debate over the canon, what Wikipedia and Wikidata show us is that there is
no monolithic canon, but many canons, depending on the data you choose to
examine. Is Shakespeare canonical? Yes, unless your corpus is the more than
100 Wikipedia language editions without an entry on Shakespeare.
Since Goethe’s famous words on world literature in his conversation with
Eckermann on January 31, 1827, the concepts of “world” and “literature”
have been investigated and argued over. The Eurocentrism embedded in
comparative and world literature studies – what Franco Moretti famously
referred to as work that is “fundamentally limited to Western Europe, and
mostly revolving around the river Rhine (German philologists working on
French literature)” (Moretti 54) – has given way to broader perspectives and
different contexts. Important, in this regard, has been the development of the
concept of “worlding” (as summed up in D’haen 12–27), which exposes the
putative objectivity of the scholar of world literature.
At the same time, the advent of digital humanities has helped to find new ways
of approaching the entire debate, through large-scale literary analyses that tap
into online resources like Google Books, the HathiTrust Digital Library and
other full-text corpora, as well as reader-oriented platforms like Goodreads,

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

library catalogs and, more recently, Wikipedia, the world’s largest encyclopedia,
started in 2001, and Wikidata, the immensely growing knowledge graph,
launched in 2012.
The first attempt at a large-scale examination of the reception and
representation of world literature through Wikipedia was a 2017 article by
Hube et al., a team of scholars (two of whom are among the guest editors of
this special issue): the main author, data scientist Christoph Hube, was joined
by the computer scientist Robert Jäschke, scholars of digital humanities Frank
Fischer and Gerhard Lauer, and world literature scholar Mads Rosendahl
Thomsen. It was indicative that this team comprised specialists from different
disciplines, all working together towards opening up this research field.1
Their approach was to focus on 15 Wikipedia editions, which they
comprehensively analyzed using DBpedia, a community project which aims
to extract and provide structured information from Wikipedia. Wikidata was
still at an early stage at that time and could not have been used to design their
study in the same way. Working with DBpedia data from 2014, they ranked the
most prominent authors using quantitative and network metrics (page length,
number of in-links, PageRank writers, PageRank complete, and page views
during 2012, 2013 and 2014). The article paved the way for other articles on
the topic as well as this special issue of the Journal of Cultural Analytics.
A simpler approach was used in a 2017 monograph on Finnish writer Aleksis
Kivi (using Wikipedia data collected in 2015) by Douglas Robinson. Here, the
number of Wikipedia language versions of an entry on an author or literary
text was introduced as part of the “Metrics of World Literature” (Robinson
43–83). Since then, counting the number of Wikipedia language versions on
a literary text has been established as “a simple measure of canonicity”
(Kukkonen).
Around the same time, smaller projects were presented at digital humanities
conferences approaching the new possibilities from other angles. In a
contribution to the DH2016 conference, Miller et al. set out to identify a
subset of significant works of world literature and mine the corresponding
Wikipedia articles including their discussion pages to obtain material for
comparative studies. Their idea is showcased by a comparison of ten topics
extracted via topic modeling from the discussion pages of the English and
Italian Wikipedia articles on Homer’s Odyssey.

1 Unfortunately, the publication of Hube et al.'s article did not go as planned. It was submitted to the newly founded journal Digital Literary

Studies (https://journals.psu.edu/dls), whose first issue had just been published (vol. 1, no. 1, 2016). The article was successfully peer-reviewed
and accepted for publication. However, a second issue of the journal never appeared, and the journal closed after the first issue. In order not to
let any more time pass, the authors decided to publish the article as a pre-print on the arXiv repository, and to date this is the only citable
version.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

Another paper presented at the EADH2018 conference concentrates on
Dutch literature. Lucas van der Deijl and Roel Smeets collected outlinks from
the 2,286 articles in the Dutch Wikipedia at the time that were labeled with
the category “Dutch author” (“Nederlandse schrijver”). The outlinks were
then used to build a graph to determine which Dutch authors were canonical
based on network centrality metrics. They found that “the crowd in many
cases merely reproduces the preference for authors that have featured [on] the
reading lists of ‘our teaching institutions’ for decades.”
Studies that followed these initial attempts mainly built on the approach of
Hube et al. – Paula Wojcik and Sophie Picard’s commentary on this paper
provided theoretical reflections on the core literary concepts of “classics” and
“canon.” They highlighted the potential of Wikipedia studies to shed light on
the habits of Wikipedia authors and non-writing users and in this way to gain a
differentiated picture of canon formation.
Along those lines, Mads Rosendahl Thomsen characterized Wikipedia as “a
prominent example of a source for peeking into the wisdom of the masses,
rather than the preferences of a few,” when describing the processes of
canonization within discourses of world literature (Thomsen, “Changing
Spaces” 57; see also Thomsen, “Media and Method”).
Meanwhile, in a series of articles, Jacob Blakesley drew from Hube et al. to carry
the research forward in a number of different case studies: from the Wikipedia
reception of Shakespeare and Dante, to Joyce and modern Italian poets. Unlike
Hube et al., Blakesley directly queried 300-some Wikipedia language editions,
and aimed to show the lack of global popularity of these authors (Blakesley,
“The Global Popularity of William Shakespeare in 303 Wikipedias”; Blakesley,
“World Literature According to Wikipedia Popularity and Book Translations”;
Blakesley, “The Global Popularity of Dante’s Divina Commedia”; Blakesley,
“The Wikipedia Popularity of James Joyce”).
In their forthcoming paper “Circulation and value creation using the example
of literary characters”, Sophie Picard, Paula Wojcik, and Sina Zarrieß
conducted a preliminary study for the article included in our issue. The
authors compared different types of literary value by using literary characters
as an example. In particular, they compared a list of characters from a lexicon
of literary characters, lists from popular books that rank characters according
to their significance in readers’ lives, and the ranking of characters according
to Wikipedia. They thereby showed how canonical, popular, and collaborative
types of valuation relate to each other.
The increasing importance of knowledge graphs is highlighted in two recent
papers. The first one is a review of the role of Wikidata in digital humanities
projects. There are three main applications: as a content provider, as a platform,
and as a technology stack (Zhao). Out of the 50 projects referenced in the
paper, 45 use Wikidata as content provider, much the same as some papers

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

featured in this special issue. This will hopefully encourage literary scholars to
discover the possibilities of Wikidata for their research because, as stated in the
aforementioned article, “the greater a domain’s usage of Wikidata, the more
likely its breadth and depth will increase on Wikidata” (Zhao 20).
The second recent paper we would like to mention introduces the UnderRepresented Writers Knowledge Graph (URW-KG), a discovery tool
addressing the underrepresentation of non-Western writers. The project seeks
to align data from Wikidata with three other resources, namely Goodreads,
Google Books, and Open Library (Stranisci et al.).
As we can gather from this brief literature review, there are certainly examples
of research using Wikipedia and Wikidata as sources and tools for world
literature studies. However, we felt that the potential has not begun to be fully
realized. This prompted us to propose this special issue to discover whether
there is more interest in this new theoretical paradigm. We were pleased to have
a number of scholars from different international backgrounds contribute to
our issue, which shows that this paradigm is slowly making its way in the field.
The five articles presented in this special issue share important commonalities,
but also point to different ways of analyzing literary reception through
Wikipedia, as our brief summaries will show.

Overview of this special issue
Melanie Conroy examines the notorious gender gap in Wikipedia from a new
perspective in her article “Quantifying the Gap: The Gender Gap in French
Writers’ Wikidata.” In recent years, attention has been drawn to the few female
Wikipedia editors (in particular in admin positions) and the harassment they
face, as well as to the representation of topics considered typically female and
to biographies of women: their number, length, neutrality, quality, and the risk
of being deleted. With a particular focus on French women writers, Conroy
not only analyzes their representation on Wikipedia, but also sheds light on
the “ways in which women are integrated, or not, into Wikidata’s knowledge
graph.” Using Wikidata sitelinks and statements, Wikiquote and Wikipedia
links, she measures the impact of about 5,000 writers “in ways that contribute
to world-historical narratives like national literatures, periodization, and spatial
influence.” Conroy’s research shows that the historically given gender gap in
printed encyclopedias is echoed in the Wikidata graph. There are only a few
writers, like George Sand, who are represented on a scale that can be described
as “global.” These articles are written individually and are not merely
translated, and the writer’s pseudonyms are linked properly. Most Frenchlanguage writers are represented in only one or a few language editions.
Moreover, Conroy’s data confirms previous research on Wikipedia, which
shows that historical topics are underrepresented in the online encyclopedia:
only French women writers who were active after 1800 are adequately
represented. The article concludes with some pragmatic recommendations on
how to close the gap.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

Paula Wojcik, Bastian Bunzeck, and Sina Zarrieß, in their study “The
Wikipedia Republic of Literary Characters,” explore how the world of
literature presents itself when it is viewed through the lens of literary
characters, or rather their representation in Wikipedia. By referring to Pascale
Casanova’s groundbreaking work La République mondiale des lettres (1999)
and working with a network of 7,000 characters featured on more than 19,000
independent character pages, this article demonstrates the transcultural
entanglement of languages by means of literary characters. It points to the fact
that key concepts of world literature studies in general and Casanova’s model
of the world in particular, are in need of adjustment. It also challenges the
presumed center–periphery opposition and/or the canonical status of authors,
works, and genres by means of an approach that is double-focused on users:
through the collaborative platform and through the choice of characters – the
literary unit with which readers most frequently identify with. Additionally,
this shift in perspective demonstrates the relevance of nationally and
transnationally organized fan communities and so-called minor language
editions for the representation of literature in Wikipedia.
Matylda Figlerowicz and Lucas Mertehikian, in their article “An EverExpanding World Literary Genre: Defining Magic Realism on Wikipedia,”
contribute to the discussion of what world literature is or what it means
through the lens of magic realism as represented on Wikipedia. Magic realism
is a disputed genre which oscillates between narrow (focused on its cultural
and geographical origins) and broad (focused on aesthetics) definitions. The
authors explore how Wikipedia articles from 56 different languages and
cultural traditions represent magic realism as a genre of world literature.
Specifically, they perform a close reading of definitions of magic realism in
those articles to identify main themes and implicit premises. They also analyze
lists of writers and works, their mentions in articles, as well as similarities
between articles in terms of the writers they mention. This reveals that “narrow
and broad definitions of magic realism compete and overlap in Wikipedia”
and that articles draw upon a variety of (scholarly) references, often including
(or even focusing on) writers from the articles’ language, even if they are not
generally considered representatives of magic realism. The authors argue that
the concept “glocal” shows similarities to magic realism in how it is defined and
discussed and that it can also be used to frame the circulation of magic realism.
In her paper “Italian Nostalgia: National and Global Identities of the Italian
Novel,” Anna Sofia Lippolis sets out to compare the importance of
contemporary Italian literature between 1980 and 2021 in local and global
contexts. Her starting point is the realization that the nationally declared canon
and the global perception of Italian literature appear to be at odds with each
other. She applies easy-to-follow metrics like counting language versions of
articles, number of in-links and average ratings to measure the popularity of
Italian novels on Wikidata, Wikipedia and Goodreads and compares these
results to the rankings of traditional national literary awards. User-driven
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

digital platforms function as mediating instances which broaden the debate
around the national literary canon and reflect the significance of contemporary
Italian literature in a more international framework. The workflow underlying
her paper is readily transferable to literature in other languages and countries.
In his article “Escritor / Qillqaq: The Representation of Peruvian Literature
in the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedias,” Daniel Carrillo Jara investigates
the immense differences in the representation of Peruvian writers in these two
Wikipedia editions. He shows that heavily-populated and well-off Peruvian
regions are better represented in both Wikipedia editions, namely that socioeconomic status influences representation online. But, he also finds that there
is no strong correlation between digital accessibility and literary representation.
At the same time, he shows that both the Spanish and Quechua Wikipedia
editions reflect academic biases, such as the exclusion of Amazonian writers.
However, he also discovers that the representation of writers in the Quechua
Wikipedia edition is far different from that of the Spanish one, including two
dozen Quechua writers absent from the Spanish edition, whose most popular
authors are not identical. In short, both Wikipedia editions “propose different
narratives of Peruvian literature.” This case study illustrates that the Quechua
Wikipedia edition, made up of “the participation of diverse communities,” is
busy “constructing a national literary tradition.” While we must not forget
the structurally unequal elements undergirding Wikipedia, the online
encyclopedia is nonetheless an important means for minority and regional
language communities to build up their online presence and shape their literary
traditions.

Transversal aspects
In the following discussion, we highlight four transversal aspects of the world
literature debate addressed in the articles.

Literature and the world
The first aspect concerns the bigger picture. There are a variety of (sometimes
contradictory) concepts on how to define and structure world literature. Some
– like Goethe, who coined the term Weltliteratur – highlight its heterogeneity,
while others – like Erich Auerbach and Franco Moretti – rather point to a
homogenization of literary standards. Some – like David Damrosch, Venkat
Mani, Ankhi Mukherjee, and Sandra Richter – focus on dynamics such as
exchange, circulation, dissemination, and/or appropriation, while others – like
Harold Bloom and Pascale Casanova – favor rather predetermined concepts
which oppose center and periphery or address universal canonicity. The
evaluations and thus the answers to questions of whether the respective
concepts are future-oriented or reactionary, whether they testify to high moral
standards, to a cultural imperialism, or to “epistemic violence” (Spivak 155),
whether they depict a desirable or a fundamentally unjust world, whether they
connect or separate the world also vary depending on the position. The articles
in our issue confirm that the world of literature in Wikipedia and Wikidata
Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

does not present a greatly improved version of reality. Accessibility, censorship,
economic conditions, etc. determine which literatures are represented and to
what extent. According to the status quo of the world literary field (Sapiro
488), African literatures are hardly represented (with the exception of globally
acknowledged writers such as Wole Soyinka, Chinua Achebe, Ngũgĩ wa
Thiong’o, or Abdulrazak Gurnah). This issue reflects on divisions and
inequalities between the global North and South, between economically better
and worse developed regions, some of which are reinforced by a digital divide:
see, for example, Daniel Carrillo Jara’s article on Peru, which notes a significant
digital divide among regions. Among other aspects, this issue also discusses
how the marginalization of literatures and literary languages is reflected in
Wikipedia and it also addresses a marginalization that, although well-known
and mitigated by numerous efforts, persists: the underrepresentation of female
writers, as exemplified in Melanie Conroy’s article.

Canon
Canonicity, then, is the second aspect repeatedly addressed in our issue.
Considering the long history of canon debates and even wars, Wikipedia can
provide some relief. As a collaborative and bottom-up-oriented encyclopedia it
presents a plurality and diversity of canons, the absence of which is lamented
in many analyses of world literature. It unites the perspective of advocates of
so-called high-brow culture with that of fans of different genres. The articles
we gather in this issue discuss how Wikipedia mirrors the hegemony of a canon
of white European males and at the same time how it presents localized world
literary canons. They show that Wikipedia challenges the rather monolithic
idea of genre in canon debates, and how, for instance, fandom culture works
as the “invisible hand” (Winko) in processes of canon formation. But again,
we must emphasize that Wikipedia does not radically correct the conditions of
the literary world as it persists in the educational and academic system. New
entries in Wikipedia must meet the notability requirement,2 and notability is,
at some level, a measurement of value. This requirement limits the amount
and breadth of items included in Wikipedia but some younger contributors
may also partially define popularity as indicative of value. The cultural capital
gathered in both Wikipedia and Wikidata reflects awards and prizes, academic
scholarship, translations, textbooks, historical-critical editions, reviews, etc. on
the one hand, and media adaptations, blogs, fan cons, fan wikis, commodity
culture, etc. on the other. At the same time, an underrepresentation of
historical authors and literature can be observed. In her 1985 essay on the
question of literary value, Gayatri Spivak pessimistically comments “a full
undoing of the canon-apocrypha opposition, like the undoing of any
opposition, is impossible” (154). By looking at the shift in canonicity which
is performed in Wikipedia and Wikidata we can be at least a little bit more

2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Notability

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

optimistic: if there is no unifying canon, there is no static idea of what is
canonical or apocryphal. In other words, Wikipedia reveals that a “Western
canon” or global canon simply does not exist, at least for Wikipedia users.

National literature vs. world literature
The third aspect concerns the role of nationality in the world literature debates.
It is one of the presumably irresolvable paradoxes that with the category of
world literature, the category of national literature has experienced a peculiar
revival. The various re-mappings of national literatures seem to be a delayed
answer to Erich Auerbach’s apocalyptic vision:
Should mankind succeed in withstanding the shock of so mighty
and rapid a process of concentration – for which the spiritual
preparation has been poor – then man will have to accustom
himself to existence in a standardized world, to a single literary
culture, only a few literary languages, and perhaps even a single
literary language. And herewith the notion of Weltliteratur
would be at once realized and destroyed. (Auerbach 3)
Auerbach’s vision responds to the experience of having witnessed the effects of
rabid nationalism in Germany, leading to Nazism. He registers a paradox that
we know all too well in the post-national, globalized, planetary age: if nation
as a category disappears, subsumed within the global, then national literature
as a category risks disappearing, too. Were this to happen, however, the very
concept of world literature would be emptied. In contrast, Wikipedia allows
for a less apocalyptic view because it represents languages, not nations. The
language editions, the small languages, their respective authors reveal a rich
world of literature that the focus on national authors has so far obscured,
and that are often elided from histories of national literatures. At the same
time, and this is the opposite movement, the online encyclopedia strengthens
and shapes national perception. Among other aspects, our special issue
demonstrates that the representation of marginalized literary languages or
groups does not depend necessarily on the size of the nation or language
edition. It also examines how the image of a national literature is created
through circulation in local and global markets and how this national branding
is reflected in Wikipedia. Last but not least, it points to how Wikipedia articles
highlight or obscure the relevance of the national or regional for a certain genre,
as is the case with magic realism, described by Matylda Figlerowicz and Lucas
Mertehikian in their article. Following Gisèle Sapiro, we can conclude that “the
national is not systematically at odds with the international, the transnational,
the supranational, or the cosmopolitan” (500) – in both the real world and the
virtual world of the encyclopedia.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

Challenges for research
Analyzing Wikipedia, neighboring projects like Wikidata, and other websites
brings several challenges. Some of these challenges can be summarized under
the rubric of accessibility. Some sources are difficult to access because they
are neither available in standardized formats nor centrally listed. Even projects
like OpenSyllabus do not provide data equally suited for all purposes. Anna
Sofia Lippolis states that in her case study (Italian literature), she does not have
access to syllabi that would help to draw a more complete picture, nor can she
automatically process scholarly articles due to access limitations on publishers’
websites and difficulties in automatically linking them to other content (e.g.,
Wikipedia pages).
Understanding (and correctly leveraging) the complex relationships between
the different Wikimedia projects (e.g., Wikidata or Wikipedia) is another
challenge. For instance, finding out which information is available in (or
derived from) which project, or how up-to-date information is can be quite
arduous. Wikipedia and Wikidata category and class systems are particular
obstacles. In both systems, the objects of interest are not necessarily assigned
the same class (or category). In Wikidata, literary works could be linked via
the “instance of” property3 to the class “literary work,” but often they are
also classified as “book” or just “written work,” as noted by Paula Wojcik,
Bastian Bunzeck, and Sina Zarrieß in their article: “the internal categorization
in Wikidata is sometimes spurious. For example, the Holy Bible is classified
as a literary work, while its parts (e.g., the New Testament) are not. These
categorizations are at the choice of individual contributors, which can have
wide-ranging repercussions for a computational analysis.”
Furthermore, both systems are hierarchical, having categories with many
subcategories, and all of them are rarely relevant for the task at hand. This
frequently requires manual work to include missing articles (or exclude
irrelevant ones) and complicates the extraction of relevant data (sub)sets. Other
systems, like the “shelves” in Goodreads, pose similar challenges. Another
challenge for research is the changing nature of the Web, as described by Daniel
Carrillo Jara: “a Wikipedia article could have one thousand words today, but
three thousand the next week.” However, as he concludes, the analysis and the
conclusions are valid because they “explain a concrete moment in the digital
representation of Peruvian literature.”
Accounting for and processing changes (e.g., the Wikipedia revision history)
is quite tedious, as shown by a 2018 dissertation that closely scrutinizes each
and every individual edit between 2003 and 2015 in the German Wikipedia
entry on the writer Walter Höllerer (Bronner). Yet a selective description of
an article’s revision history can already be useful for tracing the evolution of

3 https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Property:P31

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

an author’s reputation within Wikipedia, as demonstrated in a volume on
Chinese-Sinophone literatures using the example of Taiwanese writer Li Ang.
It is pinpointed that she “was lifted to the rank of ‘world literature writer’ on
October 19, 2010” (Chiu 227).
Another complication is that pages in Wikipedia language editions may be
translated wholly or in part from other language editions. It can be difficult
at first glance to understand the provenance of each page, although many of
the pages created through translation in recent years contain a tag to that
effect. Finally, from the point of view of reception studies, it is challenging to
understand how long visits to Wikipedia pages last, and whether they are read
in toto, in part, or simply clicked on and then exited: while visits indicate access,
they do not necessarily indicate reading.
Having successfully acquired a suitable dataset for analysis, its content can pose
challenges as well. Some contributions focus on those challenges, particularly
bias and representation. For example, little is known about how readers of
literary works participate as writers of Wikipedia articles or contributors to
Wikidata.
Melanie Conroy specifically focuses on the gender gap in terms of editors,
numbers of articles, and length of articles dealing with female writers in
Wikipedia and Wikidata. The problems with using the data for an analysis are
the subject of the analysis itself. She also discusses other issues, for example,
the “preference for the new and technological” which leads to an overrepresentation of “popular literature and science fiction”. Meanwhile, Daniel
Carrillo Jara discusses reasons for the unequal representation of particular
groups on Wikipedia, for example, their “capacity to engage in voluntary labor,
economic conditions to spend time writing on Wikipedia, and digital literacy”.
He cites previous findings that online encyclopedias reproduce biases and
preferences, but he also notes that Wikipedia can provide different views from
different communities on the same topic (in his paper, the Quechua Wikipedia
and the Spanish Wikipedia on Peruvian literature), which can be both a
challenge and an opportunity.
Other challenges include the large percentage of data that is ingested (or
produced) by bots and typically not checked by humans, inconsistencies in
spelling, for example, in birthplaces or dates, the understanding and analysis
of articles in many different languages, and the proper assessment of the
“relevance” of a Wikipedia page – an issue that has been discussed before
(Hube et al.) but always needs to be reconsidered for the research question at
hand.
The contributions to this special issue not only raise our awareness about
these challenges but, most importantly, they also greatly expand our knowledge
about them. At the same time, this issue is meant to stimulate the field, and
suggest new paths forward. Wikipedia and Wikidata are constantly changing,

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

and we are aware that these articles have ‘expiration dates’ at least in terms of
the statistics they present. The data might change considerably, the system itself
might change parameters, censorship might play a role in specific countries,4
altering reception and contributor data. In other words, the data relied on here
is not intended to be valid sub specie aeternitatis: chances are it may be quite
changed even in the space of a decade, or even by the time you read this preface.
However, the research questions and critical analyses included in these articles
show us a number of ways of investigating Wikipedia and Wikidata.

Conclusion
The five articles assembled in this issue offer a prelude to further research
on what is probably the most ambitious encyclopedic project since Diderot
and D’Alembert’s Encyclopédie. They are a status report, fixed in time, on the
content of a rapidly changing digital environment. Far from exhausting the
possibilities for analyzing the representation of world literature in Wikipedia
and Wikidata, they are intended to provide an impetus, a stimulus, and a
motivation for future projects. We hope this special issue highlights what a
promising source Wikipedia and Wikidata are for literary studies, and we hope
to see more applications, especially some that make it possible to monitor how
things change in real time.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the authors for their contributions and close
cooperation, especially in the last weeks before completion of this issue.
Another big thanks goes to our five peer reviewers, Fabio Ciotti, César
Domínguez, Sandra Folie, Evelin Heidel, and Mads Rosendahl Thomsen, who
helped to make this issue what it is. We are very grateful to Andrew Piper for
giving us the opportunity to publish this special issue of the Journal of Cultural
Analytics and managing editor Katrin Rohrbacher for guiding us through the
process. Special thanks go to Jonah Lubin and (again) to Evelin Heidel and
Mads Rosendahl Thomsen for their critical comments and the continuous
conversation during the completion of this issue.

Funding
Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy in the context of the Cluster
of Excellence Temporal Communities: Doing Literature in a Global Perspective
– EXC 2020 – Project ID 390608380.
Submitted: February 07, 2023 EDT, Accepted: February 20, 2023 EDT

4 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Censorship_of_Wikipedia

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

references
Auerbach, Erich. “Philology and Weltliteratur.” The Centennial Review, translated by Maire and
Edward Said, vol. 13, no. 1, Winter 1969, pp. 1–17, https://www.jstor.org/stable/23738133.
Blakesley, Jacob. “The Global Popularity of Dante’s Divina Commedia: Translations, Libraries,
Wikipedia.” Bibliotheca Dantesca: Journal of Dante Studies, vol. 5, 2022, pp. 115–44,
https://repository.upenn.edu/bibdant/vol5/iss1/8.
---. “The Global Popularity of William Shakespeare in 303 Wikipedias.” Memoria di Shakespeare. A
Journal of Shakespearean Studies, vol. 5, Dec. 2018, pp. 149–71, doi:10.13133/2283-8759/14509.
---. “The Wikipedia Popularity of James Joyce.” James Joyce Quarterly, vol. 59, no. 2, Jan. 2022, pp.
289–313, doi:10.1353/jjq.0.0164.
---. “World Literature According to Wikipedia Popularity and Book Translations: The Case of
Modern Italian Poets.” Comparative Critical Studies, vol. 17, no. 3, Oct. 2020, pp. 433–58,
doi:10.3366/ccs.2020.0373.
Bloom, Harold. The Western Canon. The Books and School of the Ages. Papermac, 1995.
Bronner, Friedrich Georg. WHWP - Walter Höllerer bei WikiPedia. Technische Universität Berlin,
2018, https://doi.org/10.14279/depositonce-6865.
Casanova, Pacale. The World Republic of Letters. Translated by Malcolm D. DeBevoise, Harvard UP,
2007.
Chiu, Kuei-fen. “World Literature in an Age of Digital Technologies: Digital Archive, Wikipedia, and
Goodreads.com.” The Making of Chinese-Sinophone Literatures as World Literature, edited by
Kuei-fen Chiu and Yingjin Zhang, Hong Kong University Press, 2022, pp. 217–36, doi:10.2307/
j.ctv2j6xdjn.16.
Damrosch, David. What Is World Literature? Princeton UP, 2003.
D’haen, Theo. World Literature in the Age of Geopolitics. Brill, 2021, doi:10.1163/9789004468078.
Hube, Christoph, et al. World Literature According to Wikipedia: Introduction to a DBpedia-Based
Framework. arXiv, 2017, https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.00991.
Kukkonen, Karin. “Does Cognition Translate? Predictions, Plot, and World Literature.” Poetics
Today, vol. 41, no. 2, June 2020, pp. 243–59, doi:10.1215/03335372-8172556.
Mani, Venkat. Recoding World Literature: Libraries, Print Culture, and Germany’s Pact with Books.
Fordham UP, 2017.
Miller, Ben, et al. “Contextualizing Receptions of World Literature by Mining Multilingual
Wikipedias.” Digital Humanities 2016: Conference Abstracts, Jagiellonian University & Pedagogical
University, Kraków, pp. 282–85, https://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/83.
Moretti, Franco. “Conjectures on World Literature.” New Left Review, no. 1, 2000, pp. 54–68.
Mukherjee, Ankhi. What Is a Classic? Postcolonial Rewriting and Invention of the Canon. Stanford
UP, 2014.
Picard, Sophie, et al. “Zirkulation und Wertschöpfung am Beispiel literarischer Figuren.” Der Wert
der literarischen Zirkulation / The Value of Literary Circulation, edited by Michael Gamper et al.,
Metzler, 2023, pp. 431–53.
Richter, Sandra. Eine Weltgeschichte der deutschsprachigen Weltliteratur. Beck, 2017.
Robinson, Douglas. Aleksis Kivi and/as World Literature. Brill, 2017, doi:10.1163/9789004340268.
Sapiro, Gisèle. “The Transnational Literary Field between (Inter)-Nationalism and
Cosmopolitanism.” Journal of World Literature, vol. 5, no. 4, Nov. 2020, pp. 481–504,
doi:10.1163/24056480-00504002.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Preface: World Literature in an Expanding Digital Space

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. “Scattered Speculations on the Question of Value.” In Other Worlds.
Essays in Cultural Politics, Routledge, 1988, pp. 154–76.
Stranisci, Marco Antonio, et al. The URW-KG: A Resource for Tackling the Underrepresentation of
Non-Western Writers. arXiv, 2022, https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.13104.
Thomsen, Mads Rosendahl. “Changing Spaces: Canonization of Anglophone World Literature.”
Anglia, vol. 135, no. 1, Mar. 2017, pp. 51–66, doi:10.1515/ang-2017-0004.
---. “Media and Method: The Digitized Library of Babel.” Literature and the World, edited by Stefan
Helgesson and Mads Rosendahl Thomsen, Routledge, 2019, pp. 109–30, doi:10.4324/
9781351203678-6.
van der Deijl, Lucas, and Roel Smeets. “The Canon of Dutch Literature According to Wikipedia: A
Network Analysis of 2286 Wikipedia-Entries on Dutch Authors.” Proceedings of EADH2018:
“Data in Digital Humanities,” National University of Ireland, 2018,
https://eadh2018.exordo.com/files/papers/104/final_draft/
Abstract_Long_Paper_EADH_2018_Van_der_Deijl___Smeets_final_version.pdf.
Winko, Simone. “Literatur-Kanon als invisible hand-Phänomen.” Text+Kritik, Sonderband:
Literarische Kanonbildung, edited by Heinz Ludwig Arnold and Hermann Korte, 2002, pp. 9–24.
Wojcik, Paula, and Sophie Picard. “Klassiker@wikipedia. Klassikforschung und Digital Humanities.
Ein Kommentar zur Studie World Literature According to Wikipedia.” Klassik als kulturelle Praxis:
Funktional, intermedial, transkulturell, edited by Paula Wojcik et al., De Gruyter, 2019, pp.
151–66, doi:10.1515/9783110615760-010.
Zhao, Fudie. “A Systematic Review of Wikidata in Digital Humanities Projects.” Digital Scholarship
in the Humanities, Dec. 2022, doi:10.1093/llc/fqac083.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

