Bowman, Mike. “Text-Mining Metadata: What Can Titles Tell Us of the History of
Modern and Contemporary Art?” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 8, no. 1, June 2023,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.74602.

ARTICLE

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern
and contemporary art?
Mike Bowman1
1 Birkbeck, University of London

Keywords: text-mining metadata, contemporary art, art titles, distant reading
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.74602

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 8, Issue 1, 2023

The use of statistical text-mining to investigate the linguistic structure of textual
resources has received limited attention in digital art history. In this paper the
question I address is that of what text-mining titles as given in metadata can tell
us about the history of modern and contemporary art. To investigate this
question I constructed a dataset from the metadata for over 170,000 artworks,
drawing on the online collections of 133 art museums in 30 countries. The use of
topic modelling, parts-of-speech tagging and word counting allows me to identify
large-scale and long-run patterns in the language used in the titles of those
artworks. I set out an art historical reading of those patterns in which artistic
interests signalled by the language used in titles come and go and are re-inflected,
epistemic perspectives on the kinds of knowledge art can or should engender
change, and artists engage with the ways that the title functions. My ‘distant’
reading is consistent with the canonical history of modern and contemporary art
and cuts across the particularities of artist, period or movement which often
feature in such accounts, providing a fresh perspective on that history. It also
complements and extends the scholarship on the history of titles in the visual arts.
The analytical framework and the dataset I have developed are not limited to
answering the question addressed in this paper, and I consider some of the
possibilities for future work.

1. Introduction
In an influential 2013 paper that set out the conceptual parameters within
which much of the subsequent debate has been conducted, the visual theorist
Johanna Drucker surveyed digital humanities activity in art history (Drucker).
Drucker drew a distinction between digitized art history, which focuses on
building digital resources and tools, and digital art history, where ‘digital
methods change the way in which we understand the objects of our enquiry’
(Drucker 7). Whilst substantial progress had been made on the former,
Drucker maintained that ‘… to date no research breakthrough has been made
…’ in digital art history (Drucker 5).
Drucker proposed several areas in which digital art history could develop,
including engagement with the textual resources of art history. Textual
materials such as art criticism, art history, philosophical writings on aesthetics,
artist writings, exhibition catalogues and inventories are essential to the work
of the art historian. Drucker expressed the belief that as more of them became
available online, digital engagement would escalate dramatically. Tracing
changes in terminology could ‘expose aspects of the field that could only be
partially glimpsed through traditional reading and study’ (Drucker 8). Drucker
also remarked that more sophisticated text-mining techniques had the
potential to be ‘touchstones of new practice and thought’ (Drucker 10).

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Art historians have made extensive use of digitized resources such as catalogues
and inventories to explore questions around artistic networks, investigating
the inter-relationships of artists, dealers, patrons and others in the art world
(Fletcher and Heimreich; Joyeux-Prunel; Lincoln; Quach McCabe). However,
much less has been done to investigate the linguistic structure and content
of those resources (one notable exception is Greenwald), and studies utilising
sophisticated text-mining methods have often been led by scholars in other
fields (Smeets et al.; Garcia-Zorita and Pacios).
In this article I draw on the metatdata available in online art museum
collections. The question I address is that of what text-mining those resources
can tell us about the history of modern and contemporary art. My focus is
on the titles of the artworks. A small number of articles and monographs
have been published on the history of titles in the visual arts, (Gombrich;
Bann; Welchman; Hoek; Yeazell). Titles may also play a key role in the readings
developed by critics or art historians. The work of all these scholars shows that
titles are not merely ways of identifying works of art but are of considerable
art historical interest in their own right. Titles have mattered to those involved
in the production, distribution and reception of art. They can indicate the
subject matter of the work, have been a site for artistic innovation, can have
an ideological effect, and influence the general viewer’s or the critic’s
understanding and appreciation of the work. Indeed, one of those authors,
Stephen Bann, observes that looking at titles is one way of ‘retracing the history
of modern art as a whole’ (Bann).
What is common to the art historical literature on titles is that the authors look
at individual artists, periods, or movements and give close readings of the ways
titles contributed to the meanings of the works they named. In contrast, the
account I set out in this article adopts a distant viewpoint. As self-contained
textual units, titles are well-suited to sophisticated statistical approaches such
as those developed for natural language processing. Such tools have been used
by literary historians to look at a wide range of questions such as influence
between authors, the nature of fictional language, how conceptions of gender
difference have changed, the emergence of literary style, and racial discourse in
Japanese literature (Jockers; Allison et al.; Piper; Underwood; Long). Literary
historians have also used simple word counting of the titles of literary works
to consider questions such as how literature reflects ideologies of gender, and
to investigate their lexical richness (Moretti; Jockers). Looking at titles in
aggregate, I bring both kinds of statistical technique into art history to explore
the ways titles have been used. They allow me to identify large-scale and longrun patterns in the language used in titles, to which I give art historical
interpretations.
To develop the readings I present in this article I needed a conceptual
framework cutting across the use of titles by individual artists. And so, I have
drawn on the work of scholars who have investigated the question of what

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

a title is and how it functions. The literary theorist Gerard Genette was one
of the first to provide such an account (Genette and Crampé). More recently,
the semiotician Josep Besa Camprubi has surveyed the relevant literature (Besa
Camprubi). Although the scholars he reviews differ in their methods of
analysis and terminology, Besa Camprubi finds there is a ‘remarkable
convergence’ between them over the three functions a title can be used to
perform (Besa Camprubi 8). The first function Besa Camprubi identifies is
naming. Titles always have a nominative function. The second function of
the title is the semantic one of saying something about the work it names and
contributing to the meanings it is given. Titles can also function ‘seductively’,
and may be used to attract the attention of the reader.
In the next section I provide a critical review of my data sources and my
dataset construction. This is followed by my distant readings of titles to give
a perspective on the history of modern and contemporary art, including a
critical comparison of my work with other authors who have written on the
titles of art works and on the history of modern and contemporary art. In
the concluding section I summarize those readings. and consider the potential
for future work using the analytical framework I develop or my dataset, and
reflect on the methodological lessons that can be drawn for those working in
the digital humanities. The Appendix contains the main data tables, and the
full results of my modelling can be found at https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/
MDGEYO.

2. Data Sources and Dataset Construction
Art museums are increasingly making their collections available online, and,
although some such as the National Galleries of Modern Art in Italy and India
had yet to do so when I was compiling my dataset, those that did allowed me
to put together a dataset with a broad geographical spread. I included in my
dataset institutions that identify themselves as being a modern, contemporary,
or modern and contemporary art museum. I also included collections of
modern, contemporary or modern and contemporary art held by other
museums. I restricted my dataset to works given as paintings, sculptures,
installations or works in new media, or, if that was not available, excluded
works given as photographs or as executed on paper such as drawings, prints
and editions. The reasons for this choice are that the former have standardly
had their own titles over the whole of the period I examine in this article,
whereas that was not the case with the latter. The works in most of the
collections I sourced for my dataset are predominantly from the twentieth and
twenty-first century and so for my analysis I restricted my dataset to artworks
created in the years from 1900 to 2019. The metadata I collected for each work
included the name of the artist, their nationality or place of birth (if given), the
title, and the date or period of creation.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

I cleaned and processed this metadata in several ways for inclusion in my
dataset. I removed duplicates as identified by their collection numbers, as some
collections have multiple records for the same object, for instance presenting
images of the parts of an installation. In a manual pass through the data I
excluded curatorial additions involving the use of text in brackets where I
could be confident that was the case, for instance to give the native-language
translation of a foreign-language title. However, it is very likely I have not
identified all instances of curatorial additions in brackets. With a small number
of paintings, the collection entry records titles for works on the front (‘recto’)
and back (‘verso’) of the canvas. In these cases I retained the recto title.
In addition to art museums in English-speaking countries, several of the
museums in my dataset provide titles in English. To allow a unified analysis
of language use all across the titles in my dataset, titles in the native language
of the country in which the museum was based were translated into English
using Microsoft Translator.1 Instances of non-native and non-English titles
were identified manually, consolidated and processed through Microsoft
Translator.2 Microsoft Translator can give multiple translations for the same
word. For instance, French titles which begin ‘d’après’ and which indicate a
work ‘after’ that of another artist were translated into English as beginning
‘after’, ‘according to’, and ‘based on’, and the Portuguese phrase ‘natureza
morta’ was translated as ‘still-life’ and ‘dead nature’. In a manual pass I
identified common multiple translations and replaced them with the
appropriate English translation. In the examples just given, ‘d’après’ was
translated as ‘after’, and ‘natureza morta’ as ‘still-life’. This was supplemented
by manual examination and automated replacement of common
mistranslations, such as rendering the French title ‘Nu’ as ‘Naked’ rather than
‘Nude’. In a final step I transformed instances of British English, such as
‘colour’ and ‘realise’, to American English, respectively ‘color’ and ‘realize’.
Microsoft Translator provides literal translations with at times an unnatural
word order in English, and my dataset is likely to include a residual number
of mistranslations, multiple translations, and spelling variations.
Notwithstanding these shortcomings, the English translations in my dataset
are adequate for the readings I give in this article where titles are looked at in
aggregate and large-scale trends are given art historical interpretations. It is not
my aim to provide close readings of the titles of individual artworks, where an
appropriate translation may be a key part of the interpretation. In total, 34% of
titles, or around 60,000 in total, were translated into English using Microsoft
Translator.

1 The Microsoft translator can be found at https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/translator/.
2 I investigated the use of several automated language recognition applications to support this task but found that the accuracy rates were too low

to make the process more efficient than one involving manual examination only.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

I made further transformations of the metadata. In titles there are several ways
of indicating a numbered work, including ‘number’, ‘no.’ and ‘#’. I replaced all
of these with ‘number’, to allow the overall trends in the numbering of works
to be identified. In a semi-automated pass I transformed all Roman numerals
to Arabic numerals, to allow the levels of use of each particular number to be
identified. Manual checking was required to identify uses such as that of the
first-person singular pronoun ‘I’, of ‘x’ as used in the sizes of paintings or to
signify something unknown, of ‘v’ as a shorthand for versus, and of Roman
numerals in proper names. For each work I recorded a single year as that in
which it was created. In the large majority of cases the online collections record
a year, a season, or a date in a year on which the work was created, and that year
was entered into the dataset. If the date was given as ‘around’, ‘before’ or ‘after’
a certain year I recorded that year. In some cases the metadata gave a range of
years, often the decade in which the work was executed. I excluded items where
the ranges were longer than 20 years, otherwise I took the middle of the range as
the year of creation. This will have introduced a bias into my dataset, boosting
the number of works recorded as being created in those middle years, but will
not have affected the long-run trends.
Altogether, my dataset includes the metadata on 171,000 artworks by around
35,000 artists from the online collections of 133 art museums in 30 countries
covering Asia, Australasia, Europe, North America, and South America. Figure
1 presents the number of entries in my dataset for works with a given or
estimated creation date in each decade from the 1900s to the 2000s. In terms
of the number of words, the documents vary in size from 13,986 words in
the titles of works created in the 1900s to 70,629 words in the titles of works
created in the 1980s. Table 1 in the Appendix gives a list of the countries
housing the collections included in my dataset, together with the associated
number of entries. A complete list of the museums included in my dataset can
be found at https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/MDGEYO.
The interpretations I offer in this article are of modern and contemporary
art as it has been constructed and presented through the collecting policies
and practices of those 133 art museums. Over and above the geographical
constraints, the selection of period, and the choice of media I have already
discussed, my reading will also reflect the inclusions or exclusions of certain
types of artist or work in those collections. Several of the collections are heavily
weighted towards artists in the canonical history of modernism, and some
include a large number of works left to the institution by artists in their estates.
The art historian Terry Smith has argued that ‘no museum has succeeded fully
in becoming a site for contemporary art’, and ‘in general … the leading centers
in Euro-America celebrate those artists who … perpetuate traditional subjects’
(Smith 45). Women are substantially under-represented in the collections
included in my dataset, with that bias being most acute with artists active in the
early-twentieth century. I have not made any adjustments to the data to reflect
these factors as there is no principled way on which to make them.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 1. Number of dataset entries for works created in each decade, 1900s to 2010s.

My analysis of trends over time in the language used in titles is complicated
by the fact that in some cases the titles as they are now presented would not
have been part of the public face of titling at the time the works they name
were created. The titles of works may have been changed after they were first
exhibited, either by the artist, an owner, or a dealer. In other cases, works may
not have been put on public display when created, for instance remaining with
the artist until their death. With some works the original title may have been
lost and the work recorded as ‘no title’ or ‘untitled’.
Without a detailed study of the history of a sufficiently large selection of the
titles in my dataset it is not possible to say with a high degree of confidence
how the readings I present in this article have been influenced by these factors.
However, I have reviewed the Catalogue Raisonnés of seven artists and this
gives some comfort the impact is not substantial. In cases of re-titling or of titles
given to works left in estates, the titles may be of the same kind as the titles
of other works displayed by the artist at around the time they were created.
For instance, Mark Rothko often re-titled by re-numbering paintings, and the
titles used by the gallery managing his estate mainly consisted of color words,
a practice Rothko also followed with some of his paintings. In addition, works
where the original title has been lost are most likely to date from the early
twentieth century. Works from that time recorded as ‘no title’ or ‘untitled’
make up a very small proportion of my dataset.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

3. Titling in Modern and Contemporary Art
3.1. Topic Modelling - Titles as Signals of Artistic Interests
A topic model is a generative statistical model of a collection of documents
(Blei et al.; Boyd-Graber et al.). Each ‘topic’ is a distribution over all the words
occurring across those documents, and each document is modelled as
distribution over all the topics. Prominent topics that feature with high weight
across several documents represent recurring patterns of use of the words of
highest weight in those topics. Topics prominent only in a single text or a small
number of texts contain words whose use is distinctive of those documents.
Topic modelling is therefore a useful tool for the identification of clusters and
other patterns of language use across a body of texts.
The implementation of topic modelling I utilised is that developed by Andrew
McCallum as part of his MALLET toolkit.3 I followed the standard approach
to the development of my topic model in including only ‘content’ words,
which were also lemmatized. I excluded all punctuation marks and other nonalphanumeric symbols except for the hyphen. The hyphen is commonly used in
titles such as ‘self-portrait’, and to have excluded it would have split such titles
into two separate words each of which would have been treated independently
in the modelling. It is common in topic modelling to exclude proper names.
I investigated this option using the named entity recognizer developed by the
Stanford University Natural Language Processing Group.4 However, the level
of accuracy was low, with many proper names missed and many phrases misidentified as proper names, and so I retained proper names in the titles to
be modelled. I then experimented with varying the ways in which titles are
grouped and the number of topics to be identified. My aim was to see if a
model could be developed that supported an art historical interpretation and
where there were few or no redundant topics, in the sense of a topic of low
weight in all of the document models. The topic model meeting those aims
looked at the titles used for works created in each decade from the 1900s to the
2010s, twelve documents in total, and modelled them as being generated by 20
topics. Models that looked at each title as a separate text or grouped together
date-ordered titles in 100 title parcels or by year were not as well-suited for the
identification of long-term trends. Models with fewer than around 20 topics
did not discriminate between the words used in the titles of works created
in different decades as well as the 20-topic model. Those with more always
included redundant topics, which typically had a weight of 3% or less in all of
the documents modelled.

3 Andrew Kachites McCallum, ‘MALLET: A Machine Learning for LanguagE Toolkit.’, which can be found at https://mimno.github.io/

Mallet/index.
4 The Named Entity Recognizer can be found at https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/CRF-

NER.shtml#:~:text=Stanford%20NER%20is%20a%20Java,or%20gene%20and%20protein%20names

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 2. Topics 1, 2 and 3 proportions in the model for the titles of works created in each decade, 1900s to 2010s.

My model is dominated by three topics. For the titles of artworks created in
every decade from the 1900s to the 2010s the most prominent topic in the
model is one of those three topics, their combined weight is never less than
60%, and for all decades bar the 2000s and the 2010s they represent three of
the four topics of highest weight. No other topic is significant in the model
for more than two decades. Plotting the weights of the three dominant topics
by time shows an inter-woven cyclic pattern of change, as presented in Figure
2. The first topic, ‘topic 1’, dominates in the models for the titles of artworks
created in the early decades of the twentieth century. ‘Topic 2’ rises to be the
most prominent in the models for the titles of artworks created in the 1950s
and 1960s before declining. ‘Topic 3’ is the most prominent for the decades
from the 1970s to the 2010s, although, as can be seen from Figure 2, its
importance has also fallen back in recent decades.
To give an art historical reading of these trends I turned to the important words
in each topic. As will be seen, these support the kind of rich interpretation
of topic models developed by Andrew Goldstone and Ted Underwood, and
Andrew Piper (Goldstone and Underwood; Piper 66–93). As these scholars
stress, topics do not merely identify univocal themes. The ways words reappear across topics, the importance of words within topics, and the
prominence of topics in a text and across texts are all of interpretive
significance.
As I develop my reading in this section and the next I will compare it with
the work of John Welchman, whose monograph Invisible Colors provides an
in-depth study of titles by over 200 modern and contemporary artists, and
identifies some long-run themes in their use, and with the canonical history of
Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

modern and contemporary art (for recent surveys see Arnason and Mansfield;
Bois et al.; Smith and, Hopkins). It is not possible to summarise and adequately
reflect the complexity of that history in the space available in this article, but
I will suggest some of the ways we might compare them. As will be seen,
my readings tend to confirm the established narrative, giving some new ways
of looking at that history. In my reading I will also return to the three basic
functions of the title I discuss in the introduction.
A perspicuous way to examine the important words in a topic is through the
word cloud, which presents the frequencies of the words in a text in a manner
in which that information can be readily assimilated. In my case I generated the
word clouds with frequencies given by the weights of the 50 most important
words in each topic. The cut-off at 50 words did not represent a sharp break in
the weights of the words in the topic. Rather, I chose it as using a smaller cutoff such as 20 words excluded some of art historical value, whereas including
more words added little to my readings. In each word cloud, it is only the
relative size of words that is of interpretive significance - the larger the word
the more weight it has in the topic. The relative position and orientation in the
cloud are not important – two words being close together or having the same
orientation does not indicate any relationship between them. All the words bar
the first person singular ‘I’ are in lower case. The basic meanings of the words
in the clouds for topics 1, 2 and 3 will not have changed over the course of the
period I have modelled, although, as we will see, some of their associations have.
The word cloud for topic 1 is presented in Figure 3. As can be seen, the most
important words are predominantly those relating to the generic categories
of landscape, portrait, and still-life, or to figurative subject matter including
women, the seasons of the year, gardens, nudes, children, and flowers. Used in
titles they would most likely have expressed some sort of artistic engagement
with the figurative tradition or with figurative subject matter. As a shorthand,
we can characterise topic 1 as ‘figurational’. These figurational interests were
the most prominent large-scale signals sent through the language used in titles
during the first five decades of the twentieth century.
The generic hierarchy as institutionalised in Academic doctrine and teaching
was fundamental to the nineteenth-century European art world, including the
practice of artists and the judgements of critics, who worked both within and
against the system (Mainardi; Teukolsky). Whilst the late nineteenth century
saw the demise of history painting, topic 1 shows that it also remained
important to many artists to present their work in relation to that conceptual
and practical framework.
What displaced the figurational uses of titles were mainly those associated with
the important words in topic 2. Its word cloud is presented in Figure 4. As
that shows, the most important words include those describing the type of
work – a painting or a sculpture for instance – or the formal elements of a
painting such as shapes and colors, and the way in which they are arranged,
Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 3. Word cloud for the 50 most important words in Topic 1.

Figure 4. Word cloud for the 50 most important words in Topic 2.

with ‘composition’ in the top 10 words of the topic and ‘construction’ also
featuring in the top 50. The words ‘abstract’ and ‘form’ are also important in
this topic. I would characterise topic 2 as ‘abstract/formal’.
‘Composition’ is also an important word in topic 1, but its weight in topic 2 is
much higher, which suggests its use was increasingly dissociated from figurative
subject matter and so can be read as an expression of interest in composition

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

itself. Of the generic labels in topic 1, only ‘landscape’ persist as an important
word in topic 2, which indicates the continued engagement with that genre
of painting as other kinds of figurative painting such as the still-life and the
portrait went into a sharper decline.
‘Number’ is the word of highest weight in topic 2 and the numerals 1, 2 and
3 also feature in the top 50. Numerals can function to identify or to order.
However, topic modelling does not allow these uses to be distinguished as it
takes no account of the order of the words in the documents being modelled.
The title ‘Number 1’ might signal a desire to minimise or eliminate the title’s
semantic role as something contributing to the work’s meaning, restricting
its function to the nominative one of identification. In contrast, the words
‘Number 1’ in the title ‘Compositions in Red and Blue Number 1’ might
indicate a work to be seen as the first of a sequence and so have a significant
semantic function. To understand how the word ‘number’ and numerals
functioned we need to look at their presence in whole titles, not just as
individual word tokens. I will come on to this later in this article.
The pattern of development of topics 1 and 2 in my model is consistent with
the canonical narrative of modern art in the first half of the twentieth century.
Whilst some artists in the early century continued to work within the figurative
traditions of the nineteenth century, others in the main avant-garde
movements of that time such as Fauvism, Cubism or Der Brücke challenged
that tradition through giving different ways of seeing or representing figurative
subject matter. Interests in regard to figuration continued to be a concern for
many modern artists after the First World War, for instance with the revival
of Realism in the 1920s through movements such as Neue Sachlichkeit in
Germany, Traditionisme in France and Regionalism in the United States of
America. The combination of natural forms to present an uncanny, alternate
or subversive reality was associated with Magic Realism and was an important
strand within Surrealism from the 1920s onwards. The emergence of abstract
art as a significant trend within Modernism is often traced back to the 1910s
and associated with artists and movements such as Wassily Kandinsky, Piet
Mondrian, De Stijl and Suprematism. Abstraction grew in importance in the
1920s and 1930s, and from the 1940s to the 1970s it was a widely practiced
form of Modernism, including various strands or schools of expressive and
geometric abstraction such as Abstract Expressionism, Tachisme, Art
Informel, Concrete Art, and movements such as Post-Painterly Abstraction,
Minimalism and Op Art.
Topic 3 is the most prominent topic in my model for the titles of artworks
created in recent decades. As its word cloud presented in Figure 5 shows, the
strongest recent trends in titling include the emergence of the presentation of
artworks as ‘untitled’, alongside the signalling of an engagement with seriality,
and a continued use of numerals in titles. Indeed, ‘untitled’ dominates topic 3
much more than the words of highest weight do in topics 1 and 2. Presenting a

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 5. Word cloud for the 50 most important words in topic 3.

work as being untitled engages with the nominative aspect of the title, looking
to efface that function. As with numerals, if used as part of a short title,
‘untitled’ is also a means of minimising its semantic role. However, that is not
the case with longer titles where it appears in combination with other words. I
will present more on my reading of the use of ‘untitled’ when I look at the way
it features in whole titles.
The engagement with seriality is indicated through the presence in the top
50 words of topic 3 of ‘series’, ‘part’ and ‘project’, and the numerals from ‘1’
thru ‘12’. Numerals were also important in topic 2, but are less prominent
than in topic 3 and far fewer of them appear in the top 50. With topic 2 they
would appear to indicate a stronger association with ordering or numbering
individual works than with works to be seen as part of a larger whole. Indeed,
‘series’ and ‘part’ do not appear in the top 50 words for topic 2, whereas
‘number’ is more prominent in topic 2 than in topic 3.
The other important words of topic 3 can be read as signals of a range of
possible artistic interests. Words such as ‘art’, ‘museum’, ‘room’, and ‘wall’
might indicate an engagement with the institutional context within which
work of arts are displayed. In association with these interests, the word
‘painting’ that carries over as an important word from topic 2 to topic 3, might
indicate a re-inflection of interest away from the work of art itself towards
its institutional context. The occurrence of ‘I’, ‘life’, ‘love’, ‘death’, ‘eye’, and
‘memory’ suggest an engagement in some way with the somatic or the personal.
‘Self-portrait’ features as an important word in topic 3 and topic 1, but not
topic 2, and when seen alongside the other important words in topics 1 and
3 suggests a shifting of interests in self-representation away from the figurative
Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

towards the personal. However the important words in topic 3 are read, and
other readings are clearly possible, the interests expressed by them are more
heterogeneous than those in the other two. I have characterised topic 1 as
‘figurational’ and topic 2 as ‘abstract/formal’. Topic 3 does not have such a
succinct summary.
The kinds of interests I have associated with topic 3 can also be seen in relation
to recent developments in art. Since the 1960s art has been characterised by
an artistic plurality. Working with a wide range of media artists have engaged
with a diversity of styles and themes. Many artists have engaged with seriality
as an element of their practice. Other important themes include those of race,
personal identity and politics, and the making of art that is explicitly
challenging and questioning of institutional structures and power relations.
Artists have also looked to create a dialogue with styles or movements that came
before them, and here we might see the continued significance of topics 1 and
2 in my model for the titles of artworks created in recent decades.
The move away from traditional art forms can also be seen in my dataset.
If we look at those collections which classify work by art form, we find that
painting dominated in the first half of the twentieth century, with paintings
created in the 1900s or 1940s accounting for around 80% of the total, and for
all other decades from the 1920s to the 1950s around 70% of all works. Since
then the proportion of all works that are paintings has fallen consistently and
substantially to 36% of works created in the 2010s.5
To complete my reading of the three most prominent topics in my model, we
can note that there are no words that are important in all of them, which is
an indication of how strongly the large-scale interests expressed through titles
changed over the twentieth century.
We can also look at the art historical significance of the other topics in my
model. Table 2 in the Appendix gives the top 20 words in each of these 17
topics, ordered by the decades in which they are prominent in the model. In
all of the cases listed the topic had a weight of 4% or more in the model, and
in 60% of cases the weight was 10% or higher. These topics are largely distinct,
each sharing very few of their words of highest weight with the other nineteen
topics. The most significant overlap is that the word ‘composition’ has by far
the highest weight in the topic prominent only in the 1950s, indicating a peak
in artistic engagement with the compositional in that decade over and above
the persisting associations captured in topic 1 and topic 2.

5 I have not given the comparable proportions for sculptures as in some of the collections in my dataset works are classified as both sculptures and

installations, and similar works by the same artist are classified in some collections as sculptures and in others as installations.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

One of the themes running through John Welchman’s Invisible Colors is that of
how artists engaged with the idea of composition and how that was expressed
through their use of titles (Welchman, pp. 176 – 209 and 265 – 323). My
account gives a measure of how significant that engagement was at different
times through the twentieth century, and the peak in interest in the 1950s
sheds further light on artistic motivations for what he terms the ‘countercompositional impulse’ which emerged during that decade (Welchman 279).
Typically, the other topics can be read as reinforcing the interpretations I have
given of topics 1 to 3. Often, they include words particularising the generic
language featuring in those topics. From the 1900s to the 1940s, the topics
prominent in those decades include important words giving specific locations
or types of object as well as the names of individuals. Signals of artistic
allegiance also feature, with ‘synchromy’, 'futurist, ‘suprematist’, and
‘surrealist’ words of high weight in prominent topics from that period. The
practice of numbering works can be seen in the numerals of years featuring
as important words in topics prominent during each of the decades from the
1950s to the 2010s. ‘Modernism’ is an important word in the topic prominent
in the model for the 2000s, suggesting an artistic engagement with the
modernist tradition from the twentieth century, and with the concept of
modenism itself.
The other important words in these topics often relate to particular subjects
of artists heavily represented in the collections included in my dataset. For
instance, several collections have works from the project Insertions into
Ideological Circuits by the artist Cildo Meireles, many of which were created
in the 1970s. The river Gein was a popular subject with Piet Mondrian in his
paintings from the 1900s as he moved towards abstraction.
The art historical value of the topic model is not limited to that provided by
the most prominent topics in each decade and the most important words in
those topics. The overall distributions of topics in the model for the titles of
works created in each of the decades from the 1900s to the 2010s can give an
indication of the diversity of titling practice in each period and how that has
changed over time. The more diverse the titles used by artists the more topics
there will be of significant weight in the model for that period to capture that
variety. Conversely, the more titling is centred upon a limited set of words,
the more the topic model will be concentrated in a few topics of high weight.
A succinct measure of diversity or complexity in this sense of the degree of
concentration of the weights in a topic distribution is its entropy, which has
been used by a number of scholars to look at questions of cultural or linguistic
complexity (Juola; Lincoln; Chen et al.; Rasterhoff et al.; Long 135–40). The
entropy of a distribution can be thought of as the number of bits required to
characterise it. The higher the entropy the more spread the distribution and the
more bits required to characterise it.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 6. Entropy of topic model distributions for the titles of works created in each decade, 1900s to 2010s.

The entropy of the topic distribution in my model for each decade is shown in
Figure 6. From an art historical perspective, the absolute levels of the entropy
are less important than the change in its value over time. As can be seen, on
this measure titling became persistently and significantly more diverse from
the 1920s to the 1960s. As artists moved away from signalling a predominant
interest in, or engagement with, figuration, in aggregate the words in the titles
they used in each decade were sending out a wider range of signals. From the
1960s onwards the diversity of the interests signalled through the titles used for
works created in each decade has changed little, with the entropy of the topic
distribution roughly constant.
A more widely-used and more readily understood measure of linguistic variety
in a given collection of texts is the type-token ratio, and I was interested to
compare these two measures (Jockers 54–58; Long 139–46). Type-token ratios
can only be compared meaningfully between documents of the same word
length, or number of tokens. The documents with the higher type-token ratios
contain more word types, and so draw on a richer vocabulary. I took as my base
the decade with the fewest words used in titles, the 1900s with 13,986 words,
and for each subsequent decade took the first 13,986 words in a randomized
list of all the titles from that period. The results of my analysis are presented in
Figure 6. As can be seen, it mirrors the trends in the diversity of titling practice
as measured by the entropy of the topic model distribution for each decade.
With the titles of works created in the 1900s, each word type was used 3.3 times
on average. Using a comparable number of word tokens, each word type was
used 2.5 times on average with the titles of works created in all decades from
the 1960s to the 2010s.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 7. Type-token ratio of the titles of works created in each decade, 1900s to 2010s.

3.2. Parts of Speech - signals of epistemic perspectives
My topic modelling has allowed me to set out a reading of the large-scale trends
in the use of the ‘content’ words of titles during the twentieth century. The use
of other components of titles may also be of art historical significance. Parts-ofspeech tagging is one way of investigating that question, as well as other issues
more directly related to my interpretation of the topic model. It measures the
use of all classes of ‘syntactic token’ including different types of word such as
nouns, adjectives or verbs, and other types of token such as numerals, symbols,
and punctuation marks.
One way of reading the parts of speech distribution for the titles of works
created in each decade is as an indication of epistemic perspective, or the kind
of knowledge art can or should produce. In the first half of the twentieth
century the predominant parts of speech were nouns, prepositions,
determiners, and adjectives. The sorts of titles they were used in were typically
declarative or descriptive such as Interior with Violin, The Seine near Paris
or Composition in Red and so expressive of a static, objective, or third-person
epistemic perspective. Since the 1950s that stance has been changing to be
one that is more dynamic, subjective, questioning, and opinionising. There
has been a modest but steady move away from declarative and descriptive
titles to the subjective, interrogative, exclamatory or imperative title, and which
seems to suggest a re-orientation of the relationship between the artist, artwork
and viewer. This has happened through an increase in the use of personal
pronouns, of end-sentence punctuation such as the exclamation mark, the
question mark, and the ellipsis, of modals such as ‘can’ or ‘should’ and ‘whwords’ such as ‘who’, ‘what’, ‘where’ and ‘how’. Examples of this kind of title

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 8. ‘Objective’ and ‘subjective’ parts of speech, proportion of all syntactic tokens in the titles of works created in
each decade, 1900s to 2010s.

include Listen and be Quiet! and May I Help You?. The growing use of text in
brackets as an aside from the artist is another way this has happened. The use
of verbs and adverbs in titles has also grown. Through being used in titles such
as Succeeding the Past, I would read this trend as showing an increased interest
in process, agency, and change. Often verbs and other parts of speech have gone
together in titles such as How to Make a Refugee and We Could be Looking for
the Same Things.
The overall trends in the use of these different parts of speech is shown in
Figure 8. For ease of presentation, I have labelled nouns, prepositions,
determiners, and adjectives taken together, but excluding all instances of
‘untitled’, as ‘objective’. I have labelled brackets, personal pronouns, endsentence punctuation, modals, verbs, adverbs, and all instances of ‘untitled’
followed by additional text as ‘subjective’. The remaining syntactic tokens are
predominantly ‘untitled’ when used on its own and numerals, which I have
excluded as I would not read them as strongly suggesting one epistemic stance
or another. As can be seen ‘objective’ parts of speech have fallen from over 80%
of all syntactic tokens in the titles of works created in each decade from the
1900s to the 1940s, to 65% in the 2010s. ‘Subjective’ parts of speech have risen
from around 10% of all syntactic tokens in the titles of works created in the
1940s to 21% in the 2010s.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

In my analysis I used the tagger developed by the Stanford University Natural
Language Processing Group to determine the proportion of all syntactic
tokens with each part of speech for the titles of works created in each decade.6
The Stanford tagger has a reported accuracy of 97% in assigning parts of speech
for English. A lower level of performance with titles is to be expected as titles
are often short and so provide less context to the tagger than other texts.
However, in my reading I grouped together all kinds of adjectives and nouns
as ‘objective’ parts of speech, and so this measure is unaffected by mis-taggings
such as singular nouns as plurals, nouns as proper nouns, and adjectives as
nouns. Similarly, the ‘subjective’ parts of speech include verbs of all kinds, and
so the measure is unaffected by mis-taggings such as past tense verbs as past
participles. Some mis-taggings such as nouns as verbs and adverbs as adjectives
will have affected the subjective and objective measures. To get an indication of
how well the tagger was identifying the subjective and objective parts of speech
I compared the results of using the tagger with my subjective assignments for
500 randomly selected titles. Overall it was 98% correct.

3.3. Word Counting – engagement with the functions of the title
John Welchman has examined the various ways artists used what he terms
‘non-referential’ titling, in which works were presented as ‘untitled’ or with
numerical titles (Welchman 8). This is also a theme I read from the results
of my topic modelling, where I suggested that the use of numerals and of
‘untitled’ in short titles were ways of minimising the role of the title in
contributing to the meanings given to the work it names. I also commented my
interpretation was incomplete as the context of use was not being taken into
consideration. If we now look at how the word length of titles has changed
and at the words used in them, then I would read these uses of titles as part
of a much broader trend of ‘minimal’ titling extending through the twentieth
century and into the twenty-first. The semantic role of titles is also lessened
through reducing the number of words in them, for instance to simple
descriptions of the subject matter or to generic labels. Titles such as ‘landscape’
and ‘mother and child’ were in common use in the early decades of the
twentieth century, with short titles such as ‘painting’ and ‘abstract
composition’ frequent in the 1940s and 1950s.
A consolidated measure of these trends is that of the prevalence of short titles
of three words or fewer in length, which I have also split into short titles
including ‘untitled’, short titles including a numeral and not including
‘untitled’, and other type of short title.7 These trends are shown in Figure 9
and, as can be seen, minimal titling has always been a major component of
titling practice. The proportion of all titles of length three words or fewer rose

6 The Stanford University Natural Language Processing Group Part of Speech Tagger can be found at https://nlp.stanford.edu/software/

tagger.shtml.
7 The overlap between short titles including ‘untitled’ and those including a numeral is small. Of all short titles including ‘untitled’ or a numeral,

only at most 2% in any decade include both.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 9. Minimal titling – proportion of titles of word length three words or fewer, works created in each decade, 1900s
to 2010s.

persistently and markedly from 56% with works created in the 1900s to 75%
in the 1950s before falling back to 64% in the 2010s. Within that overall trend,
short titles including ‘untitled’ peaked at 12% of all titles of works created in the
1980s, and has declined since then to 9% of all titles in the 2010s. Short titles
including a numeral but not ‘untitled’ peaked in the 1960s at 7% of all titles of
works created in that decade. Other types of short title rose to 67% of all titles
in the 1940s, before declining to represent 49% of the titles of works created in
the 2010s.
In my reading of topic 3 I suggested that presenting a work as ‘untitled’ engages
with the nominative function of the title, a dimension to that practice not
considered by Welchman. The trend in this use of titles is shown in Figure
10. As can be seen, the presentation of works as untitled first emerged in the
1930s, and was most prominent in the 1990s, with 13% of the titles of works
created in that decade including ‘untitled’. Comparing Figures 8 and 9 shows
that presenting works as untitled was predominantly associated with their use
in short titles, and so simultaneously looking to minimise the semantic role of
the title. Of the titles of works created in all decades from the 1960s to the
2010s only 1% to 2% included ‘untitled’ and were of word length four or more,
and so had a significant semantic role, for instance with the titles often used by
Dan Flavin in which text in brackets was utilised to give a personal dedication
from the artist as with untitled (to Don Judd, colorist).
Whilst minimal titling has declined in recent decades, the use of long titles
and the syntactic complexity of titles have both been growing. After having
declined in the first half of the twentieth century, use of long titles of ten words

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 10. Proportion of titles including ‘untitled’, works created in each decade, 1900s to 2010s.

or more then picked up, growing from 1.0% of all titles of works created in
the 1950s to 5.0% in the 2010s, as shown in Figure 11. The parts of speech
model shows that in recent decades there has been more variety in the parts of
speech used in titles, including increased use of all kinds of punctuation mark.
A succinct measure of the syntactic complexity of titles in this sense is the
entropy of the parts of speech distribution, and, as can be seen from Figure 11,
this has been rising steadily from the 1940s. Long or syntactically complex titles
can be used to do many things. One is that they would have stood out from the
often-minimal titles around them and so functioned ‘seductively’, attracting
the attention of the reader.

4. Summary and Discussion
The metadata provided in exhibition catalogues is an under-used resource in
digital art history. In this article I have brought a range of statistical techniques
to bear on those resources, using them individually and in combination to
investigate how text-mining titles as given in the metadata with online art
museum collections can be used to look at the history of modern and
contemporary art. These techniques include topic modelling, parts-of-speech
tagging and word counting. The dataset I compiled was metadata including the
work’s title and the year of creation for over 170,000 entries downloaded from
the online collections of 133 art museums in 30 countries.
The perspective provided by my application of statistical text-mining
techniques to this metadata is very different in scale and in content to that
provided in the art historical literature. It cannot replace the kind of detailed
account of titles given in that scholarship. Rather, text-mining, as I have used it,
provides a distant viewpoint delivering rich numerical and visual descriptions.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Figure 11. Long title of length 10 words or more, entropy of the parts of speech distributions, titles of works created in
each decade, 1900s to 2010s.

These descriptions, whether numerical or graphical, give new ways of seeing
the ways titles have been used and some of the developments within modern
and contemporary art. They also support a reading in more recognisably art
historical terms, which is consistent with that given in earlier accounts of titling
and with the canonical history of modern and contemporary art. The long-run
trends which I identify and give art historical interpretation to suggest some
new ways of thinking about that history, cutting across the particularities of
earlier accounts.
In my reading of the results of the topic model we can see an inter-woven
cyclic pattern of change in which the large-scale use of titles to express certain
interests increases in importance, becomes dominant and is then displaced.
Titular signals in relation to figuration are displaced primarily by those relating
to abstraction and the formal dimension to painting, and to numbering, which
in turn give way to the more heterogeneous set of interests expressed through
the words in topic 3. What cut across the expression of the two types of interest
dominant in the first half of the twentieth century was an epistemic stance in
which titles expressed an objective and stable perspective. In the second half
of the twentieth century and into the twenty-first, the kinds of interest I read
from topic 3 were associated with a more subjective and questioning epistemic
position. Minimal titling, in which artists looked to minimise the semantic role
of the title, was a major trend all through the twentieth century and into the
twenty first. In recent decades the strongest trend in titling has been that of
presenting works as untitled, which is a way of engaging with the nominative
function of the title.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Statistical modelling of titles in aggregate also allows me to answer other
questions that cannot be addressed through conventional art historical
methods. In particular, through an appeal to the information theoretic concept
of entropy and to type-token ratios I have interpreted my model results in
terms of the levels of diversity and complexity in the use of titles and in their
syntax.
The readings set out in this article represent a first step in the digital art
historical analysis of titles and the metadata contained in online museum
collections. The interpretive framework and the dataset are not limited to
looking at titling in modern and contemporary art as a whole. To end this
article I will suggest some of the ways in which they could be utilised to address
a number of art historical questions, and in ways which both extend the digital
methods of this article and use them in combination with conventional art
historical methods.
The value of digital art history in transforming established narratives and in
opening up new areas of enquiry often comes when it is used at scale or
to investigate the complex inter-relationships between features represented in
a dataset. Digital methods have been one way art historians have looked at
questions around networks and geographies, often challenging the dominant
histories of modern and contemporary art (Joyeux-Prunel; Nijboer). I am in
the process of assigning a nationality to each of the artists named in my dataset.
This will allow me to investigate the circulation of the ideas, interests and
perspectives I have read from the results of my modelling between artists of
different nationalities and to address questions such as whether those interest
emerged earlier or were more prominent with artists of one nationality than
with others. Assigning a gender to each artist would allow a similar analysis to
be carried out for male and female artists.
The question of the canon is one which has engaged art historians since the
1980s. Scholars have looked to identify canonical formations, and to historicize
and critique the production of canons and canonical value (Brszyski; Iskin).
The art historian Robert Jensen has used statistical methods to address this
question, counting the canonical through the levels of appearance of artists
in 38 art survey textbooks published in America, and arguing that canonical
status derives from innovation (Jensen). As he puts it ‘quantitative analysis is
uniquely suited to understanding the collective perceptions of a discipline…’
(Jensen 28). My dataset could allow a comprehensive quantitative analysis of
artistic canons in modern and contemporary art, as produced through the
prominence of an artist in museum collections. It could look both in aggregate
at my dataset and also at cross-country comparisons. The analytical framework
I have developed provides one way in which canonical and non-canonical
artists could be compared. I have not collected metadata on accessioning dates,
but adding that to my dataset could also shed light on canon formation and

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

canon change. It may be of museological interest to compare the collections
of modern and contemporary art included in my dataset, and to look at the
representation of artistic careers.
It would be of art historical value to have a detailed understanding of the
emergence and adoption of the presentation of works as untitled and the
conventional use of ‘untitled’ to describe such a work. My dataset provides
a starting point, identifying artists who began presenting works that way.
Supplementing this with traditional art historical methods including
examination of contemporary exhibition catalogues, artist writing, journals
and critical reviews, could allow that history to be written.
Looking further out, we can speculate on whether the cyclic pattern of change
that can be seen in my topic model continues. If the topic modelling were
repeated in, say, ten years, would topic 3 remain dominant or would a topic 4
have emerged, expressing new interests and concerns or subsuming some of the
interests previously expressed through topic 3?
My work can also be considered from the methodological perspective. The
interpretations I have developed show the value of considering a topic model
as a whole rather than as a thematic analysis in which topics are treated
independently and univocally. Parts-of-speech analysis is typically used in the
digital humanities as a first step to further analysis. For instance, to identify the
adjectives used in a text as part of an analysis of the sentiments being expressed
or to isolate the proper nouns, which can then be extracted as part of the text
preparation in topic modelling. It may also be used for classificatory purposes
with the pattern of use of different parts of speech as a marker utilised to
identify the author of a text. However, in the digital humanities it has been
used only rarely to provide representations that are of further interpretive
significance (Allison et al.). In my own reading I have looked to give art
historical interpretations to all parts of the topic model and of the parts of
speech model.
Researchers in the digital humanities often look at one quantitative technique,
or at several sequentially, where one is seen as improving upon the previous in
answering the research question. My work shows that there can be benefit in
using statistical techniques in combination to develop a consolidated reading.
The various perspectives provided by topic modelling, parts-of-speech analysis
and count-based statistics complement each other and, in the cases of the
use of the numerals and ‘untitled’, are required to develop a more complete
interpretation.
Data repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/MDGEYO
Submitted: October 10, 2022 EST, Accepted: November 22, 2022 EST

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

references
Allison, Sarah, et al. “Style at the Scale of the Sentence.” Stanford Literary Lab Pamphlets, vol. 5,
2013, https://litlab.stanford.edu/pamphlets/.
Arnason, Hjorvadur H., and Elizabeth C. Mansfield. History of Modern Art. Pearson, 2013.
Bann, Stephen. “The Mythical Conception Is the Name: Titles and Names in Modern and PostModern Painting.” Word & Image, vol. 1, no. 2, Apr. 1985, pp. 176–89, https://doi.org/10.1080/
02666286.1985.10435674.
Besa Camprubi, Jose. Nouveaux actes sémiotiques No 82: Les fonctions du titre. Presses Universitaires
de Limoges, 2002.
Blei, David M., et al. “Latent Dirichlet Allocation.” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 3, no.
1, 2003, pp. 993–1022, https://doi.org/10.5555/944919.944937.
Bois, Yves-Alain, et al. Art Since 1900: Modernism, AntiModernism, Postmodernism. Thames &
Hudson, 2004.
Boyd-Graber, Jordan, et al. “Applications of Topic Models.” Foundations and Trends® in Information
Retrieval, vol. 11, no. 2–3, 2017, pp. 143–296, https://doi.org/10.1561/1500000030.
Brszyski, Anna, editor. Partisan Canons. Duke University Press, 2007.
Chen, Ruina, et al. “Entropy in Different Text Types.” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, vol. 32,
no. 3, 2017, pp. 528–42, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqw008.
Drucker, Johanna. “Is There a ‘Digital’ Art History?” Visual Resources, vol. 29, no. 1–2, June 2013,
pp. 5–13, https://doi.org/10.1080/01973762.2013.761106.
Fletcher, Pamela, and Anne Heimreich. “Local/Global: Mapping Nineteenth-Century London’s Art
Market.” Nineteenth Century Art Worldwide, vol. 11, no. 3, 2012, https://www.19thcartworldwide.org/autumn12/fletcher-helmreich-mapping-the-london-art-market.
Garcia-Zorita, Carlos, and Ana R. Pacios. “Topic Modelling Characterization of Mudejar Art Based
on Document Titles.” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, vol. 33, no. 3, Oct. 2017, pp. 529–39,
https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqx055.
Genette, Gérard, and Bernard Crampé. “Structure and Functions of the Title in Literature.” Critical
Inquiry, vol. 14, no. 4, July 1988, pp. 692–720, https://doi.org/10.1086/448462.
Goldstone, Andrew, and Ted Underwood. “The Quiet Transformation of Literary Studies: What Can
Topic Models of PMLA Teach Us About the History of Literary Scholarship?” New Literary
History, vol. 45, no. 3, 2014, pp. 359–84, https://doi.org/10.1353/nlh.2014.0025.
Gombrich, Ernst. “Image and Word in Twentieth-Century Art.” Word & Image, vol. 1, no. 3, July
1985, pp. 213–41, https://doi.org/10.1080/02666286.1985.10435861.
Greenwald, Diana S. Painting by Numbers: Data-Driven Histories of Nineteenth-Century Art.
Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2021.
Hoek, Leo H. Titres, toiles et critique d’art, Déterminants institutionnels du discourse sur l’art aux dixneuvième siècle en France. Brill, 2001.
Hopkins, David. After Modern Art: 1945 – 2017. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2018.
Iskin, Ruth, editor. Re-Envisioning the Contemporary Art Canon: Perspectives in a Global World.
Routledge, 2016.
Jensen, Robert. “Measuring Canons: Reflection on Innovation and the Nineteenth-Century Canon
of European Art”.” Partisan Canons, edited by Anna Brszyski, Durham and London, Duke
University Press, 2007, pp. 27–54.
Jockers, Matthew L. Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois
Press, 2013, https://doi.org/10.5406/illinois/9780252037528.001.0001.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Joyeux-Prunel, Béatrice. “Provincializing Paris, the Center-Periphery Narrative of Modern Art in the
Light of Quantitative and Transnational Approaches.” Artl@s Bulletin, vol. 4, no. 1, 2015,
https://docs.lib.purdue.edu/artlas/vol4/iss1/4/.
Juola, P. “Using the Google N-Gram Corpus to Measure Cultural Complexity.” Literary and
Linguistic Computing, vol. 28, no. 4, June 2013, pp. 668–75, https://doi.org/10.1093/llc/fqt017.
Lincoln, Matthew. “Social Network Centralization on Print Production in the Low Countries, 1550
– 1750.” International Journal for Digital Art History, no. 2, 2016, pp. 1550–750,
https://dahj.org/article/social-network-centralization.
Long, Hoyt. The Value in Numbers: Reading Japanese Literature in a Global Information Age.
Columbia University Press, 2021, https://doi.org/10.7312/long19350.
Mainardi, Patricia. The End of the Salon. Cambridge University Press, 1993.
Moretti, Franco. “Style, Inc. Reflections on Seven Thousand Titles (British Novels, 1740–1850).”
Critical Inquiry, vol. 36, no. 1, Jan. 2009, pp. 134–58, https://doi.org/10.1086/606125.
Nijboer, Harm et. “Unthinking Rubens and Rembrandt: Counterfactual Analysis and Digital Art
History.” Digital Humanities, 2019.
Piper, Andrew. Enumerations: Data and Literary Study. University of Chicago Press, 2018,
https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226568898.001.0001.
Quach McCabe, Sophia. “Intermediaries and the Market: Hans Rottenhammer’s Use of Networks in
the Copper Painting Market.” Arts, vol. 8, no. 2, June 2019, pp. 75–96, https://doi.org/10.3390/
arts8020075.
Rasterhoff, Claartje, et al. “Measuring Innovation in the Art and Book Market during the Dutch
Golden Age.” Digital Humanities Benelux, https://web.archive.org/web/20210119053958/
https://2018.dhbenelux.org/programme/detailed-programme/.
Smeets, J., et al. “SMTP: Stedelijk Museum Text Mining Project.” Digital Humanities, 2016,
https://hdl.handle.net/11245.1/69bd334a-49bf-40bb-927f-ac537024fc61.
Smith, Terry. Contemporary Art: World Currents. Laurence King, 2011.
Teukolsky, Rachel. The Literate Eye, Victorian Art Writing and Modernist Aesthetics. Oxford, Oxford
University Press, 2009.
Underwood, Ted. Digital Horizons, Digital Evidence and Literary Change. Chicago, Chicago
University Press, 2019.
Welchman, John C. Invisible Colors: A Visual History of Titles. New Haven and London, Yale
University Press, 1997.
Yeazell, Ruth Bernard. Picture Titles: How and Why Western Paintings Acquired Their Names.
Princeton University Press, 2015, https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctvc779dd.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Appendix. Data Tables
Table 1. Countries with museum collections included in the dataset, and associated number of entries.
Country

Entries

Country

Entries

Argentina

1,025

Mexico

1,471

Australia

7,295

The Netherlands

6,689

Austria

2,756

New Zealand

3,158

Belgium

1,863

Peru

337

Brazil

2,371

Poland

1,555

Chile

474

Portugal

2,124

Cuba

404

Romania

1,362

Czech Republic

972

Slovakia

6,628

Finland

6,552

Slovenia

737

France

33,653

South Korea

6,881

Germany

9,573

Spain

9,185

Greece

746

Sweden

5,528

Ireland

1,321

Switzerland

5,179

Italy

2,196

United Kingdom

6,210

Japan

6,510

United States of America

35,102

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

Text-mining metadata: What can titles tell us of the history of modern and contemporary art?

Table 2. Top 20 words in the other seventeen topics in the topic model.
Top 20 words

Decades
prominent

estaque rocky synchromy improvisation monhegan fernande gein sunlight kamenicky
wertheimer futurist birch copy fence ogunquit murnau elbe saint-cloud moulin vanderbilt

1900s and
1910s

guitar clothespin cagnes chess lady drapery ploughing alsace teenage elephant suprematism
boufarik meyer compotier tropical toulon instrument trumpeteer trapeze tobacco

1920s

santa presentation butterfly ana hall drapery shell harmony apollo independence disk 1937
1939 optical final surrealist rotorelief tatras guernica tuileries

1930s

project sculpture moving-static-moving blossom negro clown tivoli 1948 1949 gable sin 1945
sedona bacchante partisan store deadly story flower mary

1940s

composition 56 concept miniature 2nd 59 55 1950 cycladic spatial cathedral 1959 1956
prisoner diego linear 1957 1955 political upright

1950s

solomon electronic delta report position knot achrome cord finger melville force enclosure bleu
nero carriage demonstration chung synthesizer flush announcement

1960s

piece relief poem american 1964 structure reclining 63 1967 1962 1969 paper 1965 concept
prototype palgwae 1963 page 1968 bouncing

1960s

acrylic 71 collaboration blooming nirvana tube split signed attention seorak boomerang rite
tape conical diane 79 lichtenstein trick poison verse

1970s

work canvas piece selected reel surface tape poem horizon 1970 original open circuit fischer
artwork shut ideological portfolio insertion send

1970s

86 god 300 200 se horizon two-finger position directly photocopy exercise right-handedness
1988 site vertical apocalypse surface extensor 1981 1983

1980s

paradise angel pain 2000 passage suite wrong story case video mike dancing young survival ego
jerusalem ghost name echo aids

1980s and
1990s

praescriptura balcony directional 1994 1996 1997 nascens cantus 1992 streets causa piraq
web 95 a-b 1993 1991 1990 terrestris paradisus

1990s

ideal citizen lose cliff evidence delft modernism multimedia motel 180 strawberry poland
caravaggio pe unwritten laid dolmen guided doppelganger temple

2000s

france 2001 2000 2006 scene 2004 2003 2005 2008 2009 2002 earthling make width 1998
2007 penelope map collage fedex

2000s

05 01 02 07 remix fly true mix black octopus conversation fake projected 06 stolen crying
medusa finland auto exposed

2000s

weak acid cabaret founder mouth ultra blocked duplex bare 73 connection rude ruin model arm
1985 knot cuddly error tail

2010s

2010 walt store chapter ws copy 2012 paul 2011 panel ghost 2013 2017 soundtrack ramada
joan 2014 self-construction 2016 berlin

2010s

Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

