Ravina, Mark. “Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-Modern Japan.”
Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 8, no. 3, Aug. 2023,
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.84860.

ARTICLE

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan
Mark Ravina1
1 The University of Texas at Austin

Keywords: early modern Japan, interactive maps, pre-modern politics, political spaces
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.84860

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 8, Issue 3, 2023

Many of our conventional mapping practices are ill-suited to the complexities and
nuances of pre-modern politics, especially in the non-Western world. Choropleth
maps suggest that political borders are clear and uniform, but early modern
politics was characterized by ill-defined and overlapping political spheres. This
study uses interactive maps to explore the case of composite state borders in early
modern Japan. Using points, rather than polygons, to represent villages, we
reproduce how Tokugawa-era officials understood political space primarily as
population nodes, not as clearly defined polygons. In lieu of conventional
borders, we calculate Voronoi polygons to show where political authority was
spatially fragmented. Using logit analysis we show that increased spatial
contiguity allowed lords (daimyo) to establish monopolies and tax their holdings
more intensively. Other factors, such as the lord’s rank, figure prominently in the
historiography, but can not be substantiated in our analysis.

Introduction
Farmers in early modern Japan paid taxes to a welter of political entities,
ranging from large, consolidated warrior suzerainties down to tiny religious
seigneuries. How can we measure and map this complex and fragmentary
political landscape? How can we assess the impact of composite-state
geography on political power? This essay argues that computational methods
provide both new ways of visualizing political spaces, and new ways of
evaluating the spatial component of political authority. Digital interventions,
such as “born digital” maps, can help us with two distinct tasks: reconstructing
Japan’s early modern spatial imaginaries (how period actors understood space)
and evaluating the relationship between space and political power. New maps
can advance both the emic project of understanding Tokugawa conceptions of
space and the etic project of understanding how spatial consolidation affected
political control
Conventional maps of early-modern Japan (e.g., Nishioki and Hattori 1956)
are choropleth and divide the landscape into neat, color-coded blocks. But that
“jigsaw-puzzle view of discrete, bounded territories” (Lewis and Wigen 12)
reflects a modern post-Westphalian European view of sovereignty rather than
period Japanese understandings of political space. That disconnect between
our conventional cartographic practice and period concepts of space is not
unique to Japan. Choropleth maps are ideal for visualizing modern
territoriality, the division of landscapes into exclusive, bordered spaces. But
such clearly-bounded polygons are ill-suited to the political landscapes of much
of the premodern and non-Western world. As noted by Charles Maier, “despite
our taking it as a given for so long, territoriality has not been a timeless attribute

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

of human societies. It is a historical formation, and its political form was also
historical, that is, it has a beginning and an end.” (Maier 806-807) The specific
case of Tokugawa-era Japan thus highlights major conceptual challenges in
cartographic practice.
How might we map political spaces without tacitly imposing modern
territoriality? One solution is to avoid entirely “jigsaw-puzzle” polygons. As
Peter Bol has observed, premodern Chinese maps routinely emphasized points
over polygons, beginning with the world’s oldest extant grid map, the Traces
of Yu Map 禹跡圖 (1136 CE). “The near total absence of gazetteer maps
showing boundaries,” Bol argues, suggests that the cartographers understood
political space as “nested hierarchies of places” rather than neatly bounded
territories. In Song-dynasty China, as in the Tokugawa case, “although local
governments had a concept of boundaries, and knew where they were on
roads between administrative seats . . . there was no need to be exact about
boundaries if the taxpaying villages were identified.” Accordingly, he suggests
discarding the choropleth or jigsaw model in favor of a network model of
connected points (Bol, “Mapping China’s History”). Merrick Lex Berman
concurs: “Does the evidence found in pre-modern historical sources justify
spending a great deal of time trying to reconstruct estimated boundaries? My
answer is no.” (Berman)
For the European case, Luca Scholz has argued that the polygon convention
creates anachronistic spatial contiguities. “Polygon-based maps” of the Holy
Roman Empire are problematic “not just because reliable information on the
boundaries of territories and districts is hard to come by, but also because
polygon-heavy maps obscure the entangled, ambiguous, and dynamic nature
of old-regime spatial orders.” Revisiting the work of Karl Brunner on the
Electoral Palatinate, Scholz finds that Brunner’s polygon maps radically
overstate how successfully the Palatinate reasserted its authority after the
Thirty Years War (Scholz). Our best historical maps, he concludes, might
neglect borders entirely.
An alternative approach is to repurpose polygons, developing a new visual
vocabulary to match our linguistic vocabulary. Our analyses of space now
include concepts such as “middle ground,” “contact zones,” “thirdspace,” and
borderlands. Researchers have also developed typologies of borders, such as
Gülzau and Mau's five-level scale: “no-man’s land” borders, landmark borders,
checkpoint borders, barrier borders, and fortified borders (Gülzau and Mau).
Yet our visual vocabulary remains strikingly mired in convention. The maps
of the Roman Empire in the Oxford Classical Dictionary, for example, use a
single red line to depict radically different imperial “borders”. In Britain, the
edge of the empire was defined by Hadrian’s Wall, but in the North African
and Arabian deserts, borders were largely undefined. Nonetheless, the Oxford

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

maps use the same modern visual lexeme, a solid red line, to represent these
radically different phenomena. What alternative visual vocabularies might
better represent these divergent spatial adjacencies?
This essay maps early modern Japan using two strategies: both points and
polygons. The “points over polygons” strategy is valuable, first, because it is
truer to period spatial concepts. The shogunate’s major regional maps, for
example, ignored village borders and depicted villages with simple oval marks.
Points also help us visualize population densities, which were higher in the
coastal plains and low in the mountains. Further, we can use points to calculate
spatial statistics and engage the rich historiography on the relationship between
space and political authority. Did, for example, size and spatial cohesiveness
support greater political authority? This study argues that it did: large,
contiguous domains exerted greater control over the local economy. What
other factors shaped political economy? Many historians have argued that
fudai (“allied”) lords, who could serve in the shogun’s administration,
governed differently than tozama (“outside”) lords, who could not. This study
argues that any such differences were minor.
Given the value of mapping points, why use polygons? This study re-purposes
polygons to circumvent their limitations. The central failing of chorolopleth
maps is how they impute modern territoriality to the borders of Tokugawa
(and other pre-modern) political spaces, which were often vague or complex.
Simple borderlines cannot depict, for example, the shared usufruct rights and
ill-defined edges of forests. But polygons are better than points for showing
spatial adjacency. Where, for example, did clusters of villages pay harvest taxes
to the same holder? Intriguingly, while points are best useful for calculating
adjacency, polygons are more effective for visualizing those clusters.
This study uses a standard algorithm, Voronoi tessellation, to depict such
neighboring villages as same-colored blocks. As detailed below, Voronoi
tessellation creates a grid of polygons by drawing lines equidistant between
points. As mathematical artifacts, the polygons in this study are not
reconstructions of period “borders” and they do not take account of period
checkpoints. In essence, this study inverts standard practice, wherein historians
draw clear borders even where period borders were ill-defined or undefined.
This study, by contrast, argues that since Tokugawa-era village borders are
often poorly defined or difficult to reconstruct, we can rely instead on an
algorithmic alternative, a formal, standardized method for inferring psuedoborders. As mathematical artifacts, Voronoi polygons are like isobars on a
topographic map. When hiking we do not expect to see numbered, curved lines
on the ground as we ascend or descend a hill. Rather we recognize isobars as a
tool for visualizing elevation changes. Accordingly, we appreciate how isobars
have regular increments (e.g. 100 meter intervals) although the actual elevation
changes are continuous. Topographic maps help us understand terrain
precisely because they mathematically abstract elevation changes into a regular,

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

visual gradient. In the same way, we can use Voronoi polygons to visualize
spatial patterns in tax authority, e.g. compactness and coherence vs
fragmentation. As empirically grounded abstractions, such polygons can
represent the spatial extent of power without presuming to depict exact
borders.

Political Spaces in Early-modern Japan
Tokugawa-era political authorities were ambivalent about borders. The
shogunate was concerned primarily with the location on roads of villages and
checkpoints, and only secondarily with borders between provinces. A striking
example is the official 1838 shogunal map (kuniezu 国絵図) for Iyo province
(伊予国) (Figure 1). Like all kuniezu, the map depicts villages as points rather
than polygons and specifies the location of border checkpoints using mileage
markers on key roads. Between those points, however, the entire border was
labelled as undefined (kunizakai aishirazu 国境不相知): the shogunate’s
border between Iyo and Tosa provinces was thus a “checkpoint border.” The
provincial borders of Shikoku were uniquely ill-defined, and other provincial
borders were often marked by rivers and roads. Nonetheless, kuniezu reveal
how the shogunate was concerned with controlling the movement of people at
key nodes, not with establishing comprehensive territorial boundaries. Indeed,
although kuniezu show aspects of physical geography, such as forests, they
are primarily maps of people, represented as population nodes. Accordingly,
kuniezu borders do not conform to our modern sense of territoriality and are
ill-suited to conventional choropleth mapping.1
The ambiguity of Tokugawa-era borders reflects a coherent vision of political
space rather than a technological limitation: the shogunate could have created
vastly more accurate maps. Indeed, the shogunate had more accurate maps
in its own archives, the product of Inō Tadataka. In 1800, Inō, a wealthy
and successful sake brewer and rice merchant, ceded his family business to
his heir in order to focus on his avocation, surveying and cartography. For
the next seventeen years, until his death in 1818, Inō traveled the length and
breadth of Japan, some 35,000 km, compiling geospatial measurements of
unprecedented accuracy. Using a quadrant, Inō was able to measure latitude to
within seconds of a degree. His longitude measurements were less precise, since
he lacked a reliable portable timepiece, but are still useful. After Tadataka’s
death, his friends and students completed his mapping project and in 1821
they presented the shogunate with a massive atlas of 225 maps, detailing the
Japanese archipelago at scales ranging from 36,000:1 to 432,000:1. The smallscale maps included graticules (longitude and latitude lines), with the ruins of
the ancient imperial observatory in Kyoto serving as a prime meridian.2

1 For an incisive and concise discussion of kuniezu see Sugimoto 2016. For greater detail see Kuniezu Kenkyūkai 国絵図研究会編 2005.
2 Suzuki 2016

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

The shogunate received the gift and seems to have recognized the military
value of accurate physical geography. But the government made no use of Inō’s
work in its official cartography. Instead, for its final series of provincial maps
(1835-1838), the shogunate reproduced the style and format of its original
series, compiled between 1696 and 1702. Since the shogunate deliberately
ignored innovations in cartography, we need to interpret the “inaccuracies” of
kuniezu as part of a coherent, native understanding of political space.

Figure 1. Shogunal Map of Iyo province, 1838

Daimyo mapped their domains only rarely and those maps commonly follow
shogunal practice, focusing on villages as population nodes with little emphasis
on borders. Ōzu domain in modern Ehime prefecture, for example, compiled
detailed maps in 1770 and again in 1814. Like the shogunate’s kuniezu, the
Ōzu maps give detailed information for village harvest yields and border
crossings on roads, but are impressionistic for general borders. The 1814 map
(Figure 2) is especially stylized: villages are represented by rounded rectangular
labels, while the surrounding mountains are flowing green swirls. The overall
perspective is top down, but the mountains are drawn in an ad hoc mix of
landscape perspectives. As with shogunal maps, we need to understand this
lack of detail as a distinct political vision.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 2. Ōzu Domain Map, 1814

The absence of absolute coordinates in the 1814 map is especially striking
since the cartographer, Azuma Kanji 東寛治, included graticules and precise
surveyors notes in a separate series of maps. Azuma was directly influenced by
Inō, who visited Shikoku in 1808 and shared both data and techniques with
Azuma. In appreciation of Inō’s guidance, Azuma drafted 17 maps of the Ōzu
coastline and sent them to Inō (Figure 3). Despite his addition of graticules,
Azuma continued the kuniezu practice of ignoring comprehensive borders in
favor of checkpoints. The red diagonal lines at the far left and right of the
map mark the borders of the village of Konbō 今坊 with Kushi 串 (to the
East) and Kuroda 黒田 (to the West), but those “border lines” are just parallels
extending from border points on the coastal road. As straight lines, they do
not follow the hilly terrain and do not represent borders in any modern sense.
While Azuma painstakingly measured linear distances along major roads, and
elegantly depicted houses and fields, he made no attempt to define Kondo as
a fully bordered space. Accordingly, Azuma defined the size of Konbō as its
length along the coastal road (38 chō 28 kan and 4 shaku, approx. 4,237 m), a
line between two border points, rather than as an area defined by a polygon.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 3. Map of Konbō village on the Ōzu coastline by Azuma Kanji 東寛治, early 19th C.

Because modern territoriality idealizes comprehensive geospatial coordinates,
Tokugawa-era political maps seem “inaccurate.” But kuniezu are “inaccurate”
only if we misuse them. Tokugawa political maps were schematic rather than
geospatial. They simplified and abstracted unimportant (or secondary) details.
A helpful analogy is the modern mass transit map. Consider, for example, two
modern maps of the Sendai City subway system. Figure 4 depicts the system as
two simple perpendicular lines, intersecting at the Sendai central station.

Figure 4. Sendai Subway Map

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 5 allows for more complexity and shows that, in places, the North-South
line (in green) actually runs from east to west.

Figure 5. Sendai Subway Map

But both maps radically simplify the shape of the rail system, so they are
geospatially “inaccurate.” For example, at its western edge (from Aobayama
青葉山 to Yagiyama Zoological Park 八木山動物公園), the East-West line
briefly reverses direction and runs to the southeast rather than the west. By
contrast, Google Maps is geospatially accurate and shows the absolute
geographic coordinates of the stations (Figure 6). But the Google map is usable
only because we can interactively highlight the desired details. A map showing
all possible rail, bus, vehicular, and pedestrian routes from Aobayama to
Yagiyama Zoological Park would be impenetrably dense. That interactive
dimension of Google maps suggests how we might rethink historical
cartography, creating maps that combine modern interventions with the
reconstruction of historical epistemologies of space.
Because the conventions of transit maps are familiar, we do not treat these
schematic abstractions as “inaccuracies.” We know not to use a map of the
London Underground to boat on the Thames. And we accept how schematic
maps simplify secondary details (e.g., the spatial grid locations of the stations)
in favor of primary information: the sequence of stations on each line (relative
locations), travel time between stations, and the fare schedule.
Like subway or railway maps, kuniezu and domain maps were focused and
task-specific. Kuniezu focused on village harvest yields and relative positions on
roads, but simplified details that the cartographers considered secondary, such
as borders through forests. By detailing the taxable harvest and relative location
of villages, the kuniezu foregrounded a key aspect of political authority: lords
Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 6. Google Maps image of Sendai Subway

measured their wealth and status in bushels of rice and restricted the mobility
of their subjects. If we read kuniezu like transit maps, we can appreciate their
schematic focus: simplified lines make both kuniezu and transit maps more
legible. Kuniezu are jarring because they fuse practices that, in modern
cartography, belong to different genres, mixing details of physical geography
and schematic abstraction.

Choropleth and Beyond
Conventional cartographic practice ignores differences between Tokugawa and
modern spatial epistemologies. Consider, for example, a map of Ōzu (Figure
7) and surrounding territories from the official History of Ehime Prefecture
(Ehime-ken shi 愛媛県市). The map divides the prefecture into neat, domainbased blocks, but the evidentiary bases for those shapes are not revealed. How
and why did the cartographers establish those borders? Which primary and
secondary sources were consulted? Again, following convention,the text itself
is silent.
Upon careful inquiry, it becomes clear that the Ehime-ken shi map depicts
with clarity and certainty data that are by turns, unclear, contested, and
unknowable. The map gives Ōzu clear land borders to the southeast, but those
are explicitly marked on shogunal maps as unknown. At a more granular level,
consider two contrasting depictions of Nakajima Island 中島 from Ehime-ken
shi (circled in red above) and from Ōzu domain’s 1814 map (Figure 8). First,
the two maps disagree on who controlled four villages: Obama 小浜村, Ōura
大浦村, Awai 粟井村, and Uwama 宇和間村. On the Ehime-ken shi map, the
eastern and western sides of the islands are colored black, suggesting that those
villages were shogunal holdings (天領). On the 1814 Ōzu map, however, the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 7. Domains of Ehime Prefecture from Ehime-ken shi

villages (labelled with burnt orange ovals) are described as the holdings of Ōzu
domain. That conflict reflects the nuances of early-modern territorial control:
the villages were simultaneously Ōzu holdings and shogunal holdings. Those
villages had once been divided. In Ōura in the mid-1700s, for example, 116
families were under shogunal administration but 87 paid taxes to Ōzu. That
division was a perennial source of tension. Did Ōzu villagers and shogunal
villagers have the same forest rights? And should they pay regular taxes at
the same rate? Beyond those practical matters, villagers under Ōzu domain
jurisdiction complained that their neighbors under shogunal jurisdiction were
arrogant and contemptuous. In 1780, Ōzu domain surrendered its parts of
those four villages to the shogunate as part of a larger exchange of territories.
But in 1813, the shogunate granted Ōzu administrative control over the four
villages. Those shogunal parcels were henceforth azukaridokoro 預所, or
“loaned lands”: the shogunate claimed the villages’s tax yield, but entrusted
administration to Ōzu domain. Nonetheless, village control remained
unresolved. In 1843, the shogunate reversed itself and reasserted direct
authority, and then in 1850 returned control to Ōzu.3 Choropleth maps are illsuited to such fluid and contested borders.
Second, the polygons of Ehime-ken shi suggest that Nakajima Island was
divided into two clear and well-delineated political zones: a shogunal region
(solid black), and the holdings of Matsuyama domain (vertical lines). But the
island had several overlapping and contested internal borders. The border

3 Nakajima Chōshi Shiryōshū Henshū Iinkai, 161-167 and Nakajima Chōshi Henshū Iinkai, 175-180. Nakajima has also historically been

known as Kutsunajima 忽那島

Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 8. 1814 Map of Nakajima and Nuwajima

between Obama and Ōura was left unresolved when the villages were separated
in the 1580s and became a source of perennial conflict. In 1789, the villagers
of Obama protested by decamping en masse to the neighboring village of
Nagashi in Matsuyama territory. Local clergy helped arbitrate the dispute,
and Ōzu promised to resolve the border dispute. The border of Awai village
was similarly complex. Awai and the neighboring village of Hatari (畑里村)
were divided in the 1430s but the forest in-between was held in common
(iriaichi 入会地). While villagers could not cut timber there, both Awai and
Hatari collected other vegetation as food, feed, and fertilizer. The problem
of iraichi is especially acute for Nakajima because common lands included
other neighboring islands. The two nearby islands of Ōtabachijima 大館場
島 and Kotabachijima 小館場島, for example, were once the common land
of four villages — Uwama, Kumata 熊田, Yoshiki 吉木 and Nyō 饒 — but
the islands were then divided: Ōtabachijima was given to Nyō and Yoshiki and
Kotabachijima to Uwama and Kumata. Uwama villagers thus shared common
lands on multiple islands with villagers of different lords.4
Finally, cardinal directions in the 1814 Ōzu map are strikingly inconsistent. For
the main territory of Ōzu on Shikoku, south is up, but for several islands in the
Inland Sea, south is down. Because of that inconsistency, villages on Nakajima
are on the wrong side of the island: Awai and Ōura, for example, were on the
long, peninsular, northeast end of the island, but they are depicted instead
on the flat, southwest end. That “error” reflects the intentionally schematic

4 FIX FIX add note to Nakajima Chōshi Shiryōshū Henshū Iinkai FIX FIX ####

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 10. 1814 Map of Nuwajima Island 怒和島 by Azuma Kanji 東寛治, early 19th C.

nature of most early modern Japanese maps. We can contrast, for example,
the depiction of Nuwajima in the bottom right of Figure 8 with Azuma’s
personal map from the same period (Figure 10). In the latter, Azuma focused
on physical geography and included a compass rose and the calculated
circumference of the island, while the former is a more schematic
representation of political authority.
All these factors militate against using period maps to create modern
choropleth polygons. We can, however, re-purpose polygons as explicitly
analytical interventions. We can use polygons, like isobars, not as direct
representations but as fruitful abstractions. In the words of William Sewell,
“the powerful abstracting, abbreviating, and summarizing techniques of
quantitative reason” can help us see regularities that are obscure at the granular
level (Sewell 350).

Polygons beyond Choropleth
For both points and polygons, this essay draws on data from a neglected source,
the Kyūdaka kyūryō torishirabechō 旧高旧領取り調べ帳, (KKT), literally
“Survey of old tax yields and old investitures.” The KKT is essentially an
autopsy of the Tokugawa shogunate (1600-1868): a comprehensive survey of
landholding compiled by the new Meiji government as it dismantled the old
regime. The KKT recorded the size, holder name, and village name for over
95,000 parcels in over 60,000 individual villages. This study combines the KKT
data (as edited and digitized by the National Museum of Japanese History,
or Rekihaku) with geolocation search engines to estimate the location of the
villages. Many of the villages and hamlets in KKT disappeared as independent

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

political units in 1889, when the Meiji state undertook a massive administrative
consolidation, amalgamating 71,314 cities, towns, villages, and hamlets (市町
村) into 15,859 larger units.5 Although that consolidation eliminated some
55,000 administrative units, we can approximate the locations of those lost
villages and hamlets because the toponyms survive in other forms, such as the
names of modern “small statistical areas” (kochiiki 小地域),6 and vestigially
in the names of schools, civic centers, parks, businesses, bus stops, and even
highway interchanges (details of the geolocation process are in the Appendix).
Those coordinates are decidedly approximate. Different researchers using
different reference works and different search engines produce results that vary,
often by a few kilometers. Rather than attempt to resolve that “fuzziness,” this
study builds on it. At the individual village level, the imprecision of coordinate
locations reflects the imprecision of Tokugawa-era maps, detailed below. At the
aggregate level, with over 60,000 villages, small village-level variations wash out
as statistical noise. Indeed, the statistical conclusions in this study hold even
if we artificially add “noise” to the data, shifting the village locations in small
random increments.7
Using those approximate coordinates, we can create hybrid maps that capture
the political geography of Tokugawa-era Japan but allow for interactivity and
spatial statistics. Figure 11, which can be downloaded here, uses basic HTML
and JavaScript to overlay both points and polygons on satellite images. The
“villages” layer reproduces the Tokugawa-era convention of villages as points.
Instead of cartouches, the map uses mouseovers and on-click popups to relate
details such as village name, harvest yield, and tax claimants. Those interactive
elements allow for a high density of information. In order to convey villagelevel details, Tokugawa-era maps were enormous. The 1814 Ōzu map is 117cm
x 173cm (46in x 68in), and the kuniezu of Iyo is 714cm x 706cm (281in x
278in). Interactive maps capture a similar level of detail in a more manageable
format. Using pop-ups, for example, the map includes notes on “loaned lands”
on Nakajima and the common lands of Ōtabachijima and Kotabachijima.

5 The principle behind the 1889 consolidation was to create administrative districts with between 300 and 500 households. Beginning in 1956,

the government began merging villages with less than 8000 residents. As of 2022, there are only 1718 remaining districts.
https://www.soumu.go.jp/gapei/gapei2.html
6 Many toponyms survive as the names “small statistical areas” (kochiiki 小地域), spatial units introduced by the government in 1995. The

creation of “small statistical areas,” like the merging of villages, was a response to rural depopulation. Consolidating villages into larger districts
reduced administrative costs, but also created regions too large and diverse for meaningful data analysis. The administrative district of
Matsuyama city (松山市), for example, now includes the relatively densely populated prefectural capital itself, but also sparsely populated and
unpopulated islands in the Inland Sea. The single administrative region is thus subdivided, as of 2021, into 725 “small statistical areas” with
populations ranging from 0 to 7620. Many of those kochiiki retain the names of Tokugawa-era hamlets, but the borders are modern constructs.
This study therefore uses kochiiki to derive central points rather than polygons.
7 Technically, this study relies on the Law of Large Numbers and the Central Limit Theorem. Less technically, we can treat the noise in village

locations as a game of chance. A fair coin toss will produce 50% heads and 50% tails, but it is impossible to see that outcome in a single toss. The
“law of averages” appears only with multiple trials. A more suitable analogy for the spatial case might be a target shoot. Even if different archers,
shooting under different conditions, all miss the bullseye, we can assume that the bullseye lies at the rough center of their cumulative attempts.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

The “Voronoi borders” layer relies on an algorithm, Voronoi tessellation, to
create pseudo-borders. Rather than relying on period records or maps to create
village borders, Voronoi tessellation generates lines equidistant between pairs
of points, and those serve as pseudo-borders. Nodes are created where those
lines meet and those points are equidistant between three or more villages.8
How does this map improve on conventional chorolopleth maps like those in
Ehime-ken shi? The points layer reveals how valleys and littorals were densely
populated but mountain regions were not. Matsuyama, Uwajima, and
Toyohashi (a branch of Uwajima) domains, for example, appear not as
homogeneous spaces, but as c-shaped, with large empty spaces in the high
mountains and dense clusters of villages along rivers and seas. Ōzu and Niiya,
by contrast, are more evenly populated at moderate densities.
The Voronoi cells, by contrast, reveal spatial contiguities: where were villages
closest to villages with the same lord? Where were neighboring villages
beholden to a different lord? Voronoi cells reveal those relationships through
adjacent colored blocks. Unlike conventional choropleth maps, Fig. 11 makes
no attempt to represent exact borders since many of these were undefined.
Rather, the regular spiderweb pattern of cells, like the regular, nested loops of
a topographic map, is an empirically grounded abstraction.
Finally, the map is highly reproducible. The point and polygon data are all
included in the HTML file and are also available in simple txt format. The
principles behind the polygons (Voronoi tessellation) are well known, and the
relevant code can be readily shared. The map is almost entirely self-contained in
a single file: the points, polygons, and metadata (mouseover and on-click text)
are all in the HTML file and require no special software or server. The only
external dependency is zooming the satellite image base maps, which requires
an internet connection, although more limited base maps could be stored in a
single folder. In short, Fig. 11 is a “born digital” spatial visualization rather than
an incremental modification of static maps.

Quantifying Spatial Fragmentation and Political Power
The raw geospatial data behind “born digital” maps also allows us to explore
the relationship between space and power. How did spatial fragmentation
affect the excercise of political control? How can we measure the spatial
consolidation (or fragmentation) of early-modern Japanese domains? Such
measurements are complex because we need to account for many factors.
Individual villages could have multiple holders. Alternatively, some villages had
a single holder, but were surrounded by villages owing taxes to different lords.
Some daimyo holdings formed a single contiguous territory around the lord’s

8 Polygons were calculated using the R package ggvoronoi r.0.8.5, which relies on Rolf Turner's deldir package.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

castle, while other holdings were fragmented into scattered parcels. Villages at
the periphery of a lord’s holdings might be close to another lord’s or separated
by forests, lakes, or rivers.9
A simple but powerful metric for these multiple factors is the Simpson index,
a widely used metric of diversity developed by Edward H. Simpson in 1949.
The basic formula is simple: the sum of the squared proportions. For example,
in an area divided by two holders as 90% and 10%, the index is
+
= 0.82, but for a 50%-50% split the index is
+
= 0.5. The Simpson
index ranges from 0 to 1, with 0 as infinite fragmentation and 1 as complete
consolidation. The index, or similar variants, are used in a range of disciplines
(including ecology, political science and economics) to measure diversity and
competitiveness.10
We can calculate Simpson indices for any areal unit: a village-level Simpson
index would include all holders within a village, while a county-level index
would include all holders within a county. This study relies on Simpson indices
for a 5km radius around each village. Consider, for example, the Simpson index
for a 5 km radius around Sakamoto village (坂元村) near Kagoshima Castle.
The village was held entirely by the Shimazu daimyo house, as were all the
surrounding villages, so the Simpson index is 1 because = 1. At the opposite
extreme is the most fragmented village in the KKT, Saiin village (西院村) in
Kadono county (葛野郡), now a part of central Kyoto. The largest holder was
Tōji Temple, which claimed roughly 22% of the village, but it shared Saiin with
165 other holders (households, temples, and shrines). A 5 km radius around
Saiin encompasses another 125 villages and raises the total unique holders to
408. Because many of those holders claimed only a tiny portion of the yield,
the Simpson index for the area is 0.02.11 The largest holder in the radius was the
“former administrative holding of the Kyōto military commissioner” (元守護
職役知) which held 4,244 koku or 8.28% of the total yield. The second largest
holder was " administrative holding of the Kyōto military commissioner" (守
護職役知) which held 2,219 koku or 4.33% of the total yield. The third largest
holder was “former imperial house holdings” (元御料) which held 1,938 koku
or 3.78% of the total yield. The first three elements of the Simpson index are
therefore 0.083 + 0.043 + 0.038 .

9 There is an enormous bibliography on how to measure gerrymandering, but electoral districts are contiguous districts while daimyo domains

were often non-contiguous.
10 Formally, where

is the tax yield, (kokudaka) allocated to each unique holder, and X is the total kokudaka, Simpson =
. Closely
related metrics include the Gibbs-Martin and Blau indexes in sociology, psychology and management studies, and the Herfindahl index or the
Herfindahl–Hirschman index (HHI) in economics. For an overview of diversity metrics see Chiarucci, “Old and New Challenges.”

11 For the 5km radius Simpson index for Saiin village, the total yield for the area was 51,270.75 koku.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

We can calculate the Simpson index for a domain by calculating the average of
the 5 km Simpson indices for villages in which the domain was the primary
holder. The Simpson index for domains ranged from a high of 0.98 for
Kagoshima domain 鹿児島藩 to a low of 0.08 for Takaoka domain 高岡藩.12
Large, highly consolidated domains exercised greater control over their people
than smaller domains with scattered holdings. Political control is a complex
phenomenon to quantify, but we can measure one key facet through the
presence (or absence) of domain monopolies. Historians have found records
of hundreds of domain monopolies and monopsonies, covering commodities
as diverse as rice, salt, tea, sugar, lumber, cotton, indigo, ceramics, ink stones,
eggs and gelatin (寒天 kanten). The goals of such monopolies were as diverse
as the target products. Often the objective was to directly increase government
revenue by fixing prices. In other cases, the domain had the broader objectives
of promoting economic development through quality control and reliable
distribution networks. In all cases, domains needed extensive political power in
order to establish monopoly control.13
Which domains established monopolies? Monopolies were supported by two
factors: size and consolidation. As shown in Figure 12, the likelihood of
establishing a monopoly rose with size and mean Simpson index (5 km radius).
For example, only 15% of domains under 50,000 koku ran monopolies, in
contrast to 97% of domains over 200,000 koku.14 Similarly, 8% of domains
with a mean Simpson index under 0.25 ran monopolies, in contrast to 74% for
domains over 0.75. In other words, the likelihood of establishing a monopoly
rose with each factor. We can formally specify those relationships with a logistic
regression (logit) model, and estimate the underlying probabilities. In Figure
12, the dashed diagonal line marks the calculated threshold above which the
model predicts a domain monopoly: points above the line are expected to
have a monopoly and those below not. That model predicts with roughly
82% accuracy whether a domain established a monopoly. In some situations,
accuracy is a misleading metric of model performance, but in this case it points
to a robust conclusion: large consolidated domains were much more likely to
run monopolies than small, fragmented territories (Model details are in the
Appendix).15

12 This analysis omits Nanbu domain 南部藩, which was radically altered in the early Meiji era, and domains whose holdings in KKT were under

10,000 koku
13 Data on domain monopolies and monopsonies is from Yoshinaga 1973
14 Koku was measure of volume (roughly 5 bushels, or 180 liters), narrowly used to measure grain, but more widely used as a currency of account.

A landholding of 50,000 koku, for example, was understood as a parcel with an annual harvest valued at 50,000 koku of rice
15 The mean Simpson index (5km radius) was calculated for all villages where the target domain was the largest holder. Similar results obtain for

other metrics. The text above reports model accuracy, although it can be a problematic measure for unbalanced data sets. Consider, for example,
the prediction of a rare event, such as the crash of a commercial airplane. We can build a model that is extremely “accurate” simply by predicting
“no crash” for all cases. If the crash rate is 0.000001% then the model can be 99.9999% accurate even without any additional information, a
nearly perfect “no-information rate.” The problem, of course, is that such a model will have a “false negative” rate of 100%, failing to predict any
aviation problems. Accordingly, we often need metrics that account for “accurate” but useless predictions. Fortunately, the domain monopoly

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 12. Domain monopolies as a function of fragmentation and size

While the technical details of logit modelling are complex and beyond the
scope of this essay, the basic principles are straightforward and are illustrated
in Figure 13. In that graph the x-axis is the degree of fragmentation and the yaxis is the likelihood of a monopoly for each domain. The black points mark
the observed values: 1.00 (or 100% likelihood) for a monopoly and 0.00 (or
0% likelihood) for no monopoly. The red curve represents the hypothetical
likelihood of a monopoly for a given level of fragmentation. The curve is
a sigmoid (S-shaped) because the effect of fragmentation (or size) must be
asymptotic: even a huge, consolidated domain cannot have a monopoly
likelihood above 100%. The term “logit” derives from the specific
mathematical form of the sigmoid, the logistic function. Logit models adjust or
“fit” the sigmoids to the observed data, trying to get the “S” as close as possible
to the observed points. Thus, logit does not directly maximize accuracy, but
rather maximizes the fit of the likelihood curve. For the simple case of one
variable (e.g., predicting monopolies with the Simpson metric as in Figure 13),
the relevant scatter plot is fairly simple. The threshold in that model, where
the red line hits a likelihood of 0.5, is at roughly 0.625. Thus we will expect
domains with Simpson indices above 0.625 to have monopolies. More complex

data is much more balanced: 63.64% of domains ran monopolies, so the “no information accuracy” of the model is also 63.64%. Using data on
size and fragmentation, we can raise that accuracy to 82%, or roughly halfway to perfect accuracy. The value of the model is also confirmed with
more robust metrics, such as AUC = 0.88

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 13. Domain monopolies as function of fragmentation

models (such as the two and three independent variable models explored
below) are difficult or impossible to visualize, requiring three or more
dimensions, but the principles are the same.16
How good a result is 82% accuracy? If size and fragmentation fully determined
the presence of monopolies, we might reach 100% accuracy. By contrast, the
floor for predictive accuracy, the “no information rate” for this model is 64％.
For binary choices (in this case “monopoly” or “no monopoly”), the larger
category is used as the default prediction and 64％ of domains did not run
monopolies. Data on domain size and fragmentation (82% accuracy) thus gets
us roughly halfway from “no information” (64％ accuracy) to perfect
information (100% accuracy). Those formal calculations aside, the impact of
size and fragmentation is clear from Figure 12: there are no domains with
monopolies in the bottom left, and no domains without monopolies at the top
right. That conclusion is also confirmed by the parameter values (e.g. ß) in the
Appendix.
These findings confirm the seminal work of Yasuoka Shigeaki. In 1959 Yasuoka
asserted that spatial fragmentation and cohesiveness were key to explaining an
apparent paradox in Japan’s 1868 Meiji Restoration. Why, he asked, was the
Restoration led by the southwestern domains of Satsuma and Chōshū, rather
than by domains in the more economically developed Kinai region (the Osaka

, where is the observed values and ⯑ the estimated
likelihood. Parameter values were estimates using the default method in the R glm package, iteratively weighted least squares. In the interests of
reproducibility, we share a sample of 25,000 villages from the complete data, and that sample produces effectively identical logit parameters.
Effectively identical results were also obtained using gradient descent.

16 To be exact, logit models minimize a loss function

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

area)? Yasuoka posited a discrete, binary distinction between the “territorial
holdings” (領国 ryōgoku) of the southwest, which were large and consolidated,
and the “non-territorial holdings” (非領国 hiryōgoku) of the Kinai, which
were smaller and spatially fragmented. For Yasuoka, the size and fragmentation
of Kinai domains undermined their ability to formulate and execute consistent
economic policies, and thereby stopped them from converting relative
economic advantage into political power (Yasuoka 1959).
At one level, the logit model results are unsurprising: it seems intuitive that
size and spatial contiguity would enhance state capacity. In that context it is
valuable to explore where the model fails as well as where it succeeds. For
example, which small and fragmented domains ran monopolies, contrary to
expectations? While the model correctly classified 226 domains, it failed to
predict the appearance of monopolies in 20 cases. What factors did those
domains have in common?
Many such “false negatives” involved goods with highly localized production,
so the monopolies did not require control over extensive, contiguous holdings.
Kanō domain 加納藩, for example, was divided into two distinct clusters, one
in modern Gifu 岐阜県 and one in modern Ōsaka 大阪府, producing a low
Simpson score (0.25). The domain ran a monopoly on umbrellas, but umbrella
production was limited to the Gifu cluster. Thus, while Kanō holdings were
fragmented, umbrella production was not.17 In similar fashion, the small and
fragmented domain of Toyooka (豊岡藩) successfully ran a monopoly on a
type of wicker trunk (yanagikōri 柳行李) because production was limited to
the domain castle town. In some cases, production was localized because of
natural forces.18 Mori domain (森藩) in Kyushu appears too small (23,732
koku) and fragmented (0.61) to have run a monopoly. Contrary to
expectations, Mori ran a monopoly on potassium alum (myōban 明礬), used
both as a medicinal and in fine leather work. The model misclassifies Mori
because the alum salts were obtained solely from a hot spring in Tsurumi village
(鶴見村), so maintaining the monopoly did not require extensive spatial
control. Rather, establishing a domestic monopoly required lobbying to limit
imports of Chinese potassium alum into Nagasaki.19
What of “false positives,” the 26 large and consolidated domains that did not
run monopolies? It is, of course, difficult to explain the absence of a domain
initiative, but some instances are suggestive. The largest domain to lack a
monopoly was Shōnai domain 庄内藩 (listed in KKT as Ōizumi domain 大
泉藩). Shōnai was distinguished by its heavy reliance on a wealthy commoner
financier house, the Honma, for financial support. The Honma regularly

17 Okamura and Shinma 1929
18 Toyooka-shi 1981, 301-305
19 Ōita mirai shin’yō kinkō 2002, 30-33

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

extended credit to Shōnai, and then forgave the loans in return for political
access (Ravina 60). That financial support likely blunted the need for a
monopoly as a revenue source.
What other factors supported the ability to run monopolies? In both Japanese
and English historians have often looked to the status of the lord. Fudai lords
were descendants of the first shogun’s more trusted vassals and were therefore,
by hereditary privilege, eligible to serve in the shogun’s administration. In
the conventional view, the shogunate entrusted fudai with smaller, scattered
parcels and frequently changed their holdings. Those measures helped to
ensure their dependence on the shogunate and their reliability as shogunal
agents. Tozama lords, by contrast, were the descendants of the first shogun’s
less trusted vassals, including those who had sworn fealty only after defeat
in 1600. In the conventional view, they had large, contiguous holdings,
commonly at the periphery of Japan, far from the shogun’s major cities and
key castles. A smaller, third category, kamon, constituted daimyo with close
kinship ties to the shogunate. In the sample for this study 107 domains were
tozama (38.91%), 140 domains were fudai (50.91%), and 22 domains were
kamon (8.00%)
In the 1960s and 1970s, Conrad Totman and Harold Bolitho sparred over
these tozama-fudai distinctions. Totman argued that fudai domains were
markedly different from tozama holdings. Fudai lords who served as Tokugawa
officials, for example, had more fragmented holdings because their parcels were
increased or decreased based on their service to the shogun. “Even after 1700,”
he observed, “the process of rewarding officials undermined the integrity of
the domains involved.” While some older fudai domains enjoyed territorial
integrity, many fudai holdings were “artificial creations at best, not political
units proved by survival.” In Sakura domain, for example, the Hotta house
had holdings scattered over six provinces and had only limited control over
parcels far from their castle. That fragmentation “made the Hotta hostage to
the Tokugawa system” (Totman, Politics in the Tokugawa Bakufu, 1600-1843,
esp. 156-59)
Bolitho counter-argued that fudai holdings were, in general, indistinguishable
from those of tozama. He rejected as a “stereotype” the claim that fudai were
more fragmented than other domains. Cases of extreme fragmentation, such
as Sakura domain, were uncommon, as was the relocation of fudai. Although
few fudai held the same fief in 1868 as in 1630, the rate of relocation dropped
in the late 1600s, so that most fudai remained in place after the 1730s. Bolitho
rejected as “without substantial basis in fact” the argument that fudai lacked
strong ties to their holdings because of frequent relocation. (Bolitho, Treasures
Among Men, esp. 44-56)
The tozama-fudai distinction figures prominently in Japanese historiography
as well. Building on Yasuoka’s work, historians developed a “regional society
地域社会” approach that seeks to integrate local and national history. In the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Figure 14. Tozama and fudai domains

words of Yamasaki Yoshihiro, “regional society theory 地域社会論” seeks to
formulate a “grand theory” (gurandō seorī) of Japanese history that
encompasses local specificities within a national framework of differences.
Many “regional society” studies include the tozama-fudai distinction.20
Did tozama and fudai domains differ markedly in landholding and did that
shape how they exercised power? The observation that tozama domains were
large and consolidated, in contrast to small and fragmented fudai holdings,
holds for extreme values. The largest consolidated domains were indeed tozama
while the smallest and most fragmented were fudai. But the vast majority of
both types of domain lay in between those extremes. We can visualize the
tozama-fudai distinction by combining a scatter plot with convex hulls (Figure
14), revealing how extensively the two types of lord overlapped but not at
extreme values. This graph reveals the “one picture is worth a thousand words”
potential of quantitative analysis. Visually, it becomes clear that Totman’s
argument focuses on the corners of the plot, while Bolitho’s focuses on the
overlapping area at the center. The two arguments are less in conflict than they
are complementary.
What then, of domain monopolies? Following the conventional distinction
between tozama and fudai, we would expect tozama to have been more
independent and form monopolies at a higher rate. The logit modelling hints
at such a “tozama effect,” but it is relatively small and statistically tenuous.

20 The “regional society theory 地域社会論” bibliography is enormous. Key works include Yamasaki 2020; Ōshima 2008 and 2009; Iwaki 2003;

Ono et al. 2001. Quote from Yamasaki 2020, 226.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Model 2 below contrasts tozama with both fudai and kamon. The results
suggest that, for a mid-sized domain, tozama status increased the likelihood
of running a monopoly by roughly 15% over a comparable fudai domain,
but that estimate has a high margin of error. Indeed, the raw accuracy of
the model with a “tozama effect” (Model 2) is actually incrementally lower
than that of the base model (Model 1). Other model specifications, such as
dropping kamon domains from the sample, reduced all measures of model
performance. As a check for robustness, we conducted a parallel analysis using
the caret package for a tenfold cross-validated decision tree. The results were
effectively the same: fragmentation and size were important split nodes while
tozama dropped out. Finally, we arrived at a similar conclusion through simple
arithmetic: comparing 32 domains in a band around the median values in
the scatter plot, specifically between the 35th and 65th percentiles. Within
that band, 16.7% of fudai and kamon ran monopolies, compared to 21.4%
of tozama, a difference of 4.8%. In short, the tozama effect on monopoly
formation was small to none.
The shogunate’s political control, like that of the domains, was attenuated by
spatial fragmentation. Most Tokugawa holdings were in the Kinai or Kanto,
and were relatively scattered. But in areas where Tokugawa holdings were
consolidated, the shogunate functioned much like a contiguous, consolidated
domain, extracting revenue through monopolies. In the seventeenth century,
the shogunate established spatially coherent control over key resources,
including the Iwami Silver Mine, the Aikawa gold and silver mines on Sado
Island, and the forests of Hida Province.
As in daimyo domains, spatial fragmentation diminished the shogunate’s
governmental capacity. The fragmentation of the Kanto and the Kinai regions
reflect a central tension in the shogunate’s spatial authority. The shogunate
was a national government, with authority and responsibility across the
archipelago, but its own holdings were fractured, especially around its major
cities. As a result, the shogunate was a strangely weak government in its own
heartland. The commercial development of the Kanto in the later Tokugawa
period exacerbated those spatial problems. Pushed by poverty and drawn by
greater opportunity, villagers left their homes for larger towns and the Edo
metropole. That labor mobility commonly involved movement between legal
jurisdictions, creating a surge in people described by authorities as mushuku
無宿, literally “homeless,” but more accurately “unregistered,” or “lacking a
legally actionable domicile.” The growing market economy generated increased
demand for entertainments, including theater, gambling, and prostitution and
many mushuku were involved in those legally marginal or illegal activities.
Those displaced by the volatility of market forces were also drawn into criminal
gangs, which engaged in extortion and brigandage, as well as gambling and
prostitution. Because the gangs could move freely between legal jurisdictions,

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

the shogunate found it difficult to suppress them. The shogunate also struggled
with poverty relief since the poor also moved across jurisdictions (Howell;
Botsman).
Period observers considered the fragmentation of Tokugawa holdings an
impediment to Tokugawa rule. The problem was discussed, for example, by
Hoashi Banri 帆足万里 (1778―1852), essayist and domain elder (karō
家老) of Hiji 日出 domain. According to Hoashi, the fracture of shogunal
holdings diluted government authority and reduced shogunal agents to mere
tax farmers, incapable of enforcing edicts. He evocatively described the political
geography of the Kanto as a “houndstooth” pattern (kenga 犬牙). Hoashi
recommended the radical reapportionment of lands to consolidate Tokugawa
holdings around Edo and Osaka.21 The Tokugawa senior councilor Mizuno
Tadakuni attempted such a bold move in 1843, when he ordered the
consolidation of all lands within a 10 ri 里 (approx 39.3 km) radius of Edo and
Osaka castles. Daimyo and hatamoto with holdings within those areas would
receive new, equivalent parcels, further out from the castle towns. Mizuno’s
edict prompted a furious reaction that cut across class lines. Daimyo and
samurai did not want to be relocated, while commoners feared that the
transfers would trigger new land surveys and discover unreported or under
reported yields. The opposition was so intense and widespread that Mizuno
abandoned the transfer plan and resigned as chair of the shogunal council of
elders.
While neither Hoashi nor Mizuno’s bold plans were realized, the shogunate
did manage less dramatic spatial consolidation. Most notably, it created the
Kanto Itinerant Inspectors (Kantō Toshimari Deyaku 関東取締出役), a new
constabulary force authorized to cross conventional jurisdictions within the
eight provinces of the Kantō region.22 The force also cut across status
boundaries: samurai intendants were allowed to deputize commoner posses in
pursuit of criminals. The force, commonly known as the Hasshū mawari 八
州廻り, was effective in suppressing both banditry and popular uprisings. In
1866, the Hasshū mawari was deployed during the Busshū Revolt, a massive
protest against rising prices that spread across three provinces. That presaged
the Meiji state’s mobilization of commoners in its military and police. But the
reform also had the unintended consequence of exacerbating conflict within
the commoner estate, since posse members were often the local elite. Thus,
in Japanese popular culture, the Hasshū mawari are commonly depicted as
corrupt and unjust while the thieves, gamblers, and rebels they pursued are

21 See Hoashi’s 1843 essay “Tōsenpuron” 東潜夫論 in Hoashi Kinen Toshokan, 1:35-81, esp. 47-48. The curious title, literally “Thesis by an

Eastern Recluse,” is a reference to an essay by Later Han scholar Wang Fu 王符 (82 CE-167).
22 The term deyaku 出役 is also read as shutsuyaku.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

portrayed as noble anti-heroes.23 Most important, for present purposes, the
deployment of the Hasshū mawari reflects how the shogunate attempted to
resolve the problem of spatially fragmented authority.

Conclusions
In early-modern Japan, spatial coherence enhanced political power. Ruling
authorities were able to exert greater control when their holdings were exclusive
and contiguous. Shogunal officers such as Mizuno Tadakuni appreciated that
spatial dimension of political control, as revealed by their reform efforts.
Nonetheless, Tokugawa-era political authority did not correspond to modern
territoriality. In their emic cultural framework, period agents did not
conceptualize contiguous spaces as discrete “jigsaw puzzle” blocks of land,
but as clusters of villages. Standard choropoleth maps of Tokugawa-era Japan
obscure that spatial sense by treating polygons as period borders, rather than
as a modern, etic interventions. By contrast, polygons based on Voronoi cells
are explicitly interpretive and illustrate spatial contiguities without imputing
modern territoriality or assuming it a priori.
Standard, static maps require cartographers to make a choice between points
and polygons. Interactive maps, by contrast, allow us to simultaneously deploy
both. Two further advantages of such maps are transparency and
reproducibility. In conventional historical maps, the creative process is
undocumented and unreproducible. The smooth arcs of rivers and borders
produced by GIS and mapping software are based on complex calculations,
such as the Bernstein polynomials used in Bezier curves. Those calculations,
however, are hidden, so the process is both obscured and naturalized. With
Voronoi tessellation, by contrast, the process is transparent and polygons can
be reproduced from the point data.
As a challenge to conventional GIS practice, this essay echoes broader calls
for new approaches to historical maps. Anne Kelly Knowles has advocated for
a humanistic GIS that can “broaden the range of geographical methods for
visualizing the spatiality of human experience.” While historians may want to
rely on coordinate-based maps, they also need to explore alternatives: “GIS is
ideal for studying representations of space but has limited utility for studying
spatial practice.” (Knowles et al.) David J. Bodenhamer has called for “deep
maps”, which link “geographic and cultural representations of a place” and
“are visual, multilayered, and inclusive, offering multiple perspectives of a small
area of the earth” “Traditional GIS,” he argues, “is not the means for
constructing a deep map. But it is part of the solution, especially when linked
to recent advances in spatial multimedia.” (Bodenhamer) The maps in this
study are more conventional than the expansive reconceptionalizations offered
by Knowles and Bodenhamer. But this study reveals how humanistic GIS

23 Sippel. For a lively introduction to the Hasshū mawari see Ochiai 2002. For greater detail see Tokuzo 1947

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

and quantitative inquiry can be mutually supportive. If we reject the limiting
association of quantitative methods with exactitude, we can use computational
techniques such as Voronoi polygons as alternatives to precise borders. We can
use aggregate statistics to overcome the noisiness of geolocation data. Modern
computational methods can thus lead us towards, rather than away from,
Tokugawa-era spatial experiences.

Acknowledgements
I presented earlier versions of this research at the Institute for Historical Studies
at the University of Texas, Austin; Stanford University’s Center for Spatial and
Textual Analysis (CESTA); the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB);
the International Research Center for Japanese Studies (Nichibunken) in
Kyoto; and Waseda University, Tokyo. At those meetings, and in following
exchanges, I learned much from the questions and suggestions of Giovanna
Ceserani, Dan Edelstein, Grant Parker, Andrew Patrick Nelson, Burçak
Keskin-Kozat, Summit Guha, Rebekah Clements, Richard Pegg, D. Max
Moerman, Mario Cams, Elke Papelitzky, Edward Boyle, and Kazumi
Hasegawa. Fabian Drixler and Yamasaki Yoshihiro offered keen insights and
encouragement. Hilson Reidpath was an exceptional research assistant.
Thanks also to Megan Gilbert and Jessa Dahl. As always, I am indebted to Ari
Levine for his intellectual generosity and friendship.
Peer reviewers: Luca Scholz, Michelle Damian
Dataverse repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/63MIDP
Submitted: April 10, 2023 EST, Accepted: May 10, 2023 EST

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

references
Berman, Merrick Lex. “Boundaries or Networks in Historical GIS: Concepts of Measuring Space and
Administrative Geography in Chinese History.” Historical Geography, vol. 33, 2005, pp. 118–33.
Bodenhamer, David J. “The Varieties of Deep Maps.” Making Deep Maps, edited by David J.
Bodenhamer et al., Routledge, 2021, pp. 1–16, https://doi.org/10.4324/9780367743840-1.
Bol, Peter Kees. “Creating a GIS for the History of China.” Placing History: How Maps, Spatial Data,
and GIS Are Changing Historical Scholarship, edited by Anne Kelly Knowles and Amy Hillier,
ESRI Press, 2008, pp. 27–59.
---. “Mapping China’s History.” Verge: Studies in Global Asias, vol. 2, no. 2, 2016, p. 70,
https://doi.org/10.5749/vergstudglobasia.2.2.0070.
Bolitho, Harold. “The Han.” The Cambridge History of Japan, Volume 4: Early Modern Japan, edited
by John Whitney Hall, vol. 4, Cambridge University Press, 1991, pp. 183–234.
---. Treasures Among Men: The Fudai Daimyo in Tokugawa Japan. Yale University Press, 1974.
Botsman, Daniel V. Punishment and Power in the Making of Modern Japan. Princeton University
Press, 2005.
Chiarucci, Alessandro, et al. “Old and New Challenges in Using Species Diversity for Assessing
Biodiversity.” Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences, vol. 366, no. 1576, Aug. 2011, pp.
2426–37, https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0065.
Clauset, Aaron, et al. “Power-Law Distributions in Empirical Data.” SIAM Review, vol. 51, no. 4,
Nov. 2009, pp. 661–703, https://doi.org/10.1137/070710111.
Drixler, Fabian Franz, et al. Samurai and the Culture of Japan’s Great Peace. Peabody Museum of
Natural History, Yale University, 2015.
Fryer, Roland G. Jr., and Richard Holden. “Measuring the Compactness of Political Districting
Plans.” The Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 54, no. 3, Aug. 2011, pp. 493–535, https://doi.org/
10.1086/661511.
Gillespie, Colin S. “Fitting Heavy Tailed Distributions: The poweRlaw Package.” arXiv E-Prints:
arXiv:1407.3492, 2014, https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v064.i02.
Grassmueck, Georg, and Martin Shields. “Does Government Fragmentation Enhance or Hinder
Metropolitan Economic Growth?” Papers in Regional Science, vol. 89, no. 3, Mar. 2010, pp.
641–57, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1435-5957.2010.00278.x.
Gülzau, Fabian, and Steffen Mau. “Walls, Barriers, Checkpoints, Landmarks, and”No-Man’s-Land.”
A Quantitative Typology of Border Control Infrastructure.” Historical Social Research / Historische
Sozialforschung, vol. 46, no. 3, 2021, pp. 23–48.
Hayama Hisao 羽山久男. Chigyō ezu to sonraku kūkan: Tokushima, Saga, Hagi, Owari-han to
Kawachi no kuni Furuichi-gun no hikaku kenkyū 知行絵図と村落空間 : 徳島・佐賀・萩・尾
張藩と河内国古市郡の比較研究. Kokon Shoin 古今書院, 2015.
Hayama Hisao 羽山久男. Tokushimahan bunken ezu no kenkyū 徳島藩分間絵図の研究. Kokon
Shoin 古今書院, 2019.
Hoashi Kinen Toshokan 帆足万里. Hoashi Banri zenshū 帆足万里全集. Edited by Hoashi Kinen
Toshokan, vol. 1, Hoashi Kinen Toshokan 帆足記念図書館, 1926.
Howell, David L. “Hard Times in the Kantō: Economic Change and Village Life in Late Tokugawa
Japan.” Modern Asian Studies, vol. 23, no. 2, May 1989, pp. 349–71, https://doi.org/10.1017/
s0026749x00001098.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

26

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Itō Takayuki 伊藤孝幸. “Mikawa kuni tōbu de no aikyū sonryaku no shihai ni tsuite.” 三河国東部
での相給村の支配について Transactions of The Institute for Cultural Studies, Aichi Gakuin
University 人間文化：愛知学院大学人間文化研究所紀要, vol. 26, 2011, pp. 25–49.
Iwaki Takuji 岩城卓二. “Kinai, Kingoku shihai kōzō kenkyū no kadai: hiryōgokuron, bakufu
ryōgokuron, shihai kokuron ga teiki shita mono.” 畿内・近国支配構造研究の課題–非領国論
・幕府領国論・支配国論が提起したもの Rekishi Kagaku 歴史科学, vol. 173, 2003, pp.
1–12.
Kanzaki Akitoshi 神崎彰利. “Hatamoto chigyōsho 旗本知行所.” Kokushi daijiten 国史大辞典,
Yoshikawa Kōbunkan, 1979–1997.
Kawamura Hirotada 川村博忠. Edo bakufu no Nihon chizu : kuniezu, shiroezu, Nihon zu 江戸幕府
の日本地図 : 国絵図・城絵図・日本図. Yoshikawa Kōbunkan 吉川弘文館, 2010.
Kimura Motoi 木村礎, editor. Kyūdaka Kyūryō Torishirabechō 旧高旧領取調帳. 1969–1979.
Tōkyōdō shuppan 東京堂出版, 1995.
Knowles, Anne Kelly. “Historical Geographic Information Systems and Social Science History.”
Social Science History, vol. 40, no. 4, 2016, pp. 741–50, https://doi.org/10.1017/ssh.2016.29.
---. “Inductive Visualization: A Humanistic Alternative to GIS.” GeoHumanities, vol. 1, no. 2, July
2015, pp. 233–65, https://doi.org/10.1080/2373566x.2015.1108831.
---. “Why We Must Make Maps: Historical Geography as a Visual Craft.” Historical Geography, vol.
42, 2014, pp. 3–26.
Kokuritsu Kokugo Kenkyūjo 国立国語研究所. Nihon gengo chizu 日本言語地図. 1966–1974.
Kuniezu Kenkyūkai 国絵図研究会編, editor. Kuniezu no sekai: Kuniezu, province maps of Japan
made by the Tokugawa Government 国絵図の世界. Kashiwa Shobō 柏書房, 2005.
Kuwai Kaoru 桑井薫, editor. Awa Tokushima Hachisuka-ke kashin shoryōchi narabi ni kokudaka
hikae 阿波徳島藩蜂須賀家家臣所領地並石高控. Revised, Tokushima Kamon Kenkyūkai 徳
島家紋研究会, 2003.
---. Meiji san-nen Tokushima-han shokuin roku narabi ni gobunchi gokachū bungenchō 明治三年徳島
藩職員録並御分知御家中分限帳. Kuwai Kaoru 桑井薫, 1992.
Lewis, Martin W., and Kären Wigen. The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography.
University of California Press, 1997.
Maier, Charles S. “Consigning the Twentieth Century to History: Alternative Narratives for the
Modern Era.” The American Historical Review, vol. 105, no. 3, June 2000, p. 807, https://doi.org/
10.2307/2651811.
Morris, J. F. “Central Control or Parallel Evolution: Samurai Landholding in Tokugawa Japan.” Early
Modern Japan, vol. 6, no. 1, 1997, pp. 17–26.
---. “Hatamoto Rule: A Study of the Tokugawa Polity as a Seigneurial System.” Papers on Far Eastern
History (Canberra, vol. 41, 1990, pp. 9–44.
Nishioka Toranosuke 西岡虎之助, Hattori Shisō 服部之總 and Ikenaga Jiro 池永二郎. Nihon
rekishi chizu 日本歴史地図. Zenkoku Kyōiku Tosho Kabushiki Kaisha 全国教育図書株式会社,
1956.
Niwa Kunio 丹羽邦男. “Hida ‘ohayashiyama’ no ichi kōsatsu.” 飛騨「御林山」の一考察
Tokugawa Rinseishi Kenkyūjo Kenkyū Kiyō 徳川林政史研究所研究紀要, vol. 56, 1982, pp.
69–94.
Ochiai Nobutaka 落合延孝. Hasshū mawari to bakuto 八州廻りと博徒. Yamakawa Shuppansha 山
川出版社, 2002.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

27

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Ōita mirai shin’yō kinkō 大分みらい信用金庫. Furusato no isan” shirīzu 1: Beppu onsen dokuhon
「ふるさとの遺産」シリーズ 1：別府～温泉読本: Ōita mirai shin’yō kinkō 大分みらい信
用金庫. 2002.
Okamura Seiji 岡村精次 and Shinma Nitarō 神馬仁太郎. Gifu gasa ni kansuru chōsa kenkyū 岐阜
傘に関する調査研究. Gifu-ken Inaba-gun Kanō-chō 岐阜県稲葉郡加納町, 1929.
Ono Sho 小野将, et al. “Kinsei chiiki shakai-ron no genzai.” 近世地域社会論の現在 Rekishigaku
Kenkyū 歴史学研究, vol. 748, 2001, pp. 33–48.
Ōshima Mario 大島真理夫. “Kinsei chiiki shakai-ron no seika to kadai: ‘bakuhansei shihai no chiiki
ruikei’ ron no teiki.” 近世地域社会論の成果と課題–「幕藩制支配の地域類型」論の提起
Nihonshi Kenkyū 日本史研究, vol. 564, 2009, pp. 3–19.
---. “Kinsei Kinai chiiki shakai-ron no hikaku to sōgō.” 近世畿内地域社会論の比較と総合
Keizaishi Kenkyū 経済史研究, vol. 11, 2008, pp. 194–211.
Ravina, Mark. Land and Lordship in Early Modern Japan. Stanford University Press, 1999,
https://doi.org/10.1515/9780804763868.
Scholz, Luca. “Deceptive Contiguity: The Polygon in Spatial History.” Cartographica, vol. 54, no. 3,
Sept. 2019, pp. 206–16, https://doi.org/10.3138/cart.54.3.2018-0018.
Sewell, William Hamilton. Logics of History: Social Theory and Social Transformation, Chicago Studies
in Practices of Meaning. University of Chicago Press, 2005.
Shirakawabe Tatsuo 白川部達夫. Hatamoto chigyō to kokudakasei 旗本知行と石高制. Iwata Shoin,
2013.
Sippel, Patricia. “Popular Protest in Early Modern Japan: The Bushu Outburst.” Harvard Journal of
Asiatic Studies, vol. 37, no. 2, Dec. 1977, p. 273, https://doi.org/10.2307/2718676.
Suda Tsutomu 須田努. Akutō” no jūkyūseiki : minshū undō no henshitsu to “kindai ikōki” 「悪党」
の一九世紀 : 民衆運動の変質と “近代移行期. Aoki Shoten 青木書店, 2002.
Sugimoto, Fumiko. “Visualizing the Political World through Provincial Maps - Sugimoto Fumiko.”
Cartographic Japan: A History in Maps, edited by Kären Wigen et al., University of Chicago Press,
2016, pp. 48–51, https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226073194.003.0010.
Suzuki, Junko. “Seeking Accuracy: The First Modern Survey of Japan’s Coast.” Cartographic Japan: A
History in Maps, edited by Kären Wigen et al., University of Chicago Press, 2016, pp. 129–32,
https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226073194.003.0029.
Taylor, Peter J. “A New Shape Measure for Evaluating Electoral District Patterns.” American Political
Science Review, vol. 67, no. 3, Sept. 1973, pp. 947–50. https://doi.org/10.2307/1958636.
Tokuzō Imagawa 今川徳三. Hasshūmawari to daikan 八州廻りと代官. Yūzankaku 雄山閣, 1974.
Totman, Conrad. “Plantation Forestry in Early Modern Japan: Economic Aspects of Its Emergence.”
Agricultural History, vol. 60, no. 3, 1986, pp. 23–51.
---. Politics in the Tokugawa Bakufu, 1600-1843. Harvard University Press, 1967.
---. The Green Archipelago. University of California Press, 1989.
Toyooka-shi 豊岡市史. Toyooka-shi shi 豊岡市史. Toyooka-shi 豊岡市史, 1981.
Trewartha, Glenn Thomas. Japan: A Geography. University of Wisconsin, 1965.
Tsuguharu, Inaba, and Imamura Naoki, editors. Nihon kinsei no ryōgoku chiiki shakai: Kumamoto
hansei no seiritsu, kaikaku, tenkai 日本近世の領国地域社会 : 熊本藩政の成立・改革・展開.
Yoshikawa Kōbunkan, 2015.
Turner, Monica G. Landscape Ecology in Theory and Practice. 2004.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

28

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Vesey, Alexander. “Temples, Timber, and Negotiations: Buddhist-Lay Relations in Early Modern
Japanthrough the Prism of Conflicts over Mountain Resources.” Japan Review, vol. 28, 2015, pp.
67–101.
Westerveld, L., and A. K. Knowles. “Loosening the Grid: Topology as the Basis for a More Inclusive
GIS.” International Journal of Geographical Information Science, vol. 35, no. 10, Dec. 2020, pp.
2108–27, https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2020.1856854.
Wigen, Kären, et al. Cartographic Japan: A History in Maps. University of Chicago Press, 2016,
https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226073194.001.0001.
Yabuta Yutaka 藪田貫. “Chiiki shakai ron to ‘Ryōgoku chiiki shakai’ 地域社会論と「領国地域社
会」.” Nihon kinsei no ryōgoku chiiki shakai: Kumamoto hansei no seiritsu, kaikaku, tenkai 日本近
世の領国地域社会 : 熊本藩政の成立・改革・展開, edited by Tsuguharu Inaba 稲葉継陽,
and Naoki Imamura 今村直樹, vol. 稲葉継陽, 今村直樹, Yoshikawa Kōbunkan, 2015.
---. Kinsei Ōsaka chiiki no shiteki kenkyū 近世大坂地域の史的研究. Seibundō 清文堂, 2005.
---. Kokuso to hyakushō ikki no kenkyū 国訴と百姓一揆の研究. Azekura Shobō 校倉書房, 1992.
Yamasaki Yoshihiro 山﨑善弘. “Kinsei chiiki shakai-ron no dōkō to kadai: kobetsusei no haaku to
ippanka, fuhenka no ryōritu ni mukete.” 近世地域社会論の動向と課題 ――個別性の
把握と一般化・普遍化の両立に向けて―― Tōkyō Mirai Daigaku Kenkyū Kiyō 東京未
来大学研究紀要, vol. 14, 2020, pp. 221–31.
Yasuoka Shigeaki 安岡重明. Nihon hōken keizai seisaku shiron: Keizai tōsei to bakuhan taisei 日本封
建経済政策史論: 経済統制と幕藩体制. Yūhikaku 有斐閣, 1959.
Yoshinaga Akira 吉永昭. Kinsei no senbai seido 近世の専売制度. Yoshikawa Kōbunkan 吉川弘文
館, 1973.
Yuki Seigo 結城清吾. “Hida nōmin sōdō no rekishi chiri-gakuteki kenkyū.” 飛騨農民騷動の歴史
地理学的研究 Shin Chiri 新地理, vol. 7, no. 3–4, 1959, pp. 314–26, https://doi.org/10.5996/
newgeo.7.314.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

29

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Appendix
Geolocation procedures: This study relied on Rekihaku’s digitized version of
KKT, especially the administrative codes (市町村コード) added in 1990. By
reversing those codes, we were able to place hamlets/villages within modern
administrative units and create psuedo-addresses. We then used search engines
and databases (Google Maps, Bing, Mapion, the CODH Geoshape
Repository, and the Japanese government’s e-Stat spatial data) to geolocate
those addresses. We employed two checks for possible errors. First, we
investigated duplicated coordinates (multiple hamlets with the same location),
and second we checked that villages in the same county comprised a contiguous
spatial unit. Errors were corrected by referring to reference works such as
Kadokawa Nihon chimei daijiten 角川日本地名大辞典 and Nihon rekishi
chimei taikei 日本歴史地名大系 and generating new search strings. We are
continuing to “clean” this data set, but after testing various subsamples of
the data, we find that the remaining data errors can be treated as random
statistical “noise.” Notably, our conclusions are the same whether we use our
most recent, “cleanest” data or earlier, “noisier” versions.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

30

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

Model 1
ß
Constant

Model 2
odds
ratio

marginal effects at
mean

mean marginal
effects

ß

odds
ratio

marginal effects at
mean

mean marginal
effects

-14.965***

-

-

-16.246***

-

-

Simpson 5km

3.486***

32.642

0.736

0.464

2.888 **

17.955

0.611

0.379

log10(kokudaka)

2.715***

15.112

0.573

0.361

3.002***

20.130

0.635

0.394

0.682 *

1.978

0.148

0.148

tozama
n

272

272

AIC

232.14

230.812

AUC

0.88

0.884

Wald test χ2

74.279***

71.819***

No Information
Rate

63.97%

63.97%

Raw Accuracy

82.18%

81.45%

Precision

0.84

0.84

Recall

0.89

0.90

Journal of Cultural Analytics

31

Algorithmic Maps and the Political Geography of Early-modern Japan

supplementary materials
Figure 11. Interactive map of Iyo Province and select islands
Download: https://culturalanalytics.org/article/84860-algorithmic-maps-and-the-political-geography-ofearly-modern-japan/attachment/174413.html

Journal of Cultural Analytics

32

