Boyle, Dominick. “‘Authentic and Amazing’: Authenticity as an Evaluative Category in
Online Consumer Restaurant Reviews.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 7, no. 2, Feb.
2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.91289.

ARTICLE

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in
online consumer restaurant reviews
Dominick Boyle
Keywords: authenticity, online consumer restaurant reviews, computational methods, corpus driven discourse analysis, sentiment analysis
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.91289

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 7, Issue 2, 2022

Claims and evaluations of authenticity are a powerful resource in food discourse:
reviewers use evaluations of authenticity to demonstrate their expertise, and
restaurants viewed as authentic receive higher star ratings. But the multivalent
nature of authenticity presents challenges for researchers. This contribution seeks
to understand authenticity by combining computational and corpus driven
discourse analysis methods. O’Connor et al. (2017) sought to quantify the
impact of authenticity on consumer perception via four theoretical authenticity
types (type, craft, moral, and idiosyncratic). This method is tested using a sample
of US restaurant reviews and compared to sentiment analysis metrics computed
from the same dataset. All types except for moral authenticity showed a positive
effect on sentiment. Authenticity in restaurant reviews is further investigated by
examining collocates of terms referring to authenticity and compiling keywords
of subcorpora created from high and low scoring reviews. Reviewers most often
topicalize authenticity in terms of place, taste, and descriptors of ethnicity. These
findings illustrate how combining corpus driven discourse analytical and
computational methods can illuminate evaluation from multiple perspectives and
provide insights which may help to improve computational approaches in the
future.

Introduction
While restaurant reviews have traditionally come from sanctioned experts such
as food writers and restaurant critics, platforms such as Yelp, Google and
TripAdvisor offer users a plethora of information on businesses created by
other users. This has led to the rise of a now ubiquitous type of social discourse:
the consumer review. Reviewers participate in online discourse communities in
which cultural and culinary capital is built via evaluation and where reviewers
challenge existing hierarchies in food discourse while also staking their own
claims to culinary expertise (Vásquez and Chik). Reviewers are also concerned
with their own identity construction and self-presentation over the course
of a review, and employ various discursive strategies, such as “narratives to
portray their own social or psychological characteristics, role or stance” to
cast themselves in a positive light (Jurafsky et al., “Narrative Framing”). This
means that restaurant reviews are not merely a sober evaluation of the dining
experience, but messy, complex, and context dependent (Vásquez 28). This
becomes especially clear when looking in detail at the particular aspects of their
experience which reviewers evaluate and to which they draw attention. For
instance, in the following excerpt from a consumer review, the author draws
attention to the fact that the business is family owned, the family comes from
Vietnam, and that they don’t use MSG by grouping them together in one list.
What do they have in common?

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Ex. 1: This is the best pho you will ever have. They are straight
from Vietnam, family owned, no msg, authentic and amazing.
Been to los [sic] Angeles, little Saigon in Westminster, and all
over California. This is by far the best. (5 stars)
I argue that their commonality lies in the fact that they all contribute, in
different ways, to the construction of the restaurant as authentic.
In this paper I view authenticity from an attributional point of view, meaning
that it is something assigned to the restaurant, food, or experience from the
perspective of the reviewer as the result of dynamic social processes (Lacoste
et al. 2). Rather than looking at how the reviewers authenticate or legitimize
their own reviews, I am interested here in how reviewers topicalize authenticity
and utilize it as an explicit or implicit evaluative concept. Authenticity as an
evaluative concept has proven to be analytically challenging. Past research has
clearly demonstrated that restaurants seek to influence consumers’ perceptions
of authenticity and that consumers consider it an important part of their
dining experience.1 However, multiple meanings of the term make it
challenging to assess the roles that various facets of authenticity play in
consumer evaluations. This paper combines computational and corpus
linguistic approaches to more fully understand the role that authenticity plays
in the discourse of consumer reviews by addressing the following research
questions:
RQ1: How do evaluations of authenticity relate to the overall
sentiment of reviews?
RQ2: How are evaluations of authenticity realized in context
and does this align with prior theoretical models of authenticity
evaluations?

The role of authenticity in food discourse: distinction
The literature on authenticity is exceptionally broad and covers many
disciplines, but two perspectives in the literature are relevant here: a discourse
analytical approach grounded in sociolinguistics, and an applied approach
grounded in organizational and management studies. While the two
approaches come from very different backgrounds, the computational method
developed by O’Connor et al. adds a useful perspective to the predominantly
qualitative and discourse analytical approach taken in many studies on
authenticity in food discourse, as well as the corpus driven analysis in the
second half of this paper. The hope is that by combining two approaches a
fuller picture of authenticity evaluations will emerge.

1 See Jurafsky et al., “Linguistic Markers”, Skibinsky, and Vásquez and Chik.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

The work of Bourdieu has provided perhaps the most influential model for
analyzing social processes in food discourse. He argues that language use,
particularly “technical, archaic and esoteric” is a crucial distinguishing feature
between the connoisseur and the common consumer (Bourdieu 279). Common
choices in language about food by businesses or consumers can create social
cohesion within the group in question in different class or social contexts,
while also serving as grounds to distinguish one group from the other (Lakoff
150). Moreover, linguistic changes in menus over time, such as the semantic
bleaching and subsequent disappearance of gourmet from menus or
fluctuation in the length of menu item descriptions, can be seen as the result
of a continual process of negotiation of cultural capital as previous markers of
distinction become commonplace (Jurafsky et al., “Linguistic Markers”; Lakoff
156–57). One aspect that is consistently oriented to by both restaurants and
customers as a source of distinction is authenticity, but the ways in which
authenticity is invoked and the meanings of the term vary widely from context
to context.

Sociolinguistic Approaches to Authenticity
In general, three to six senses or types of authenticity are common in the
literature.2 Coupland's influential model includes the five semantic dimensions
of ontology, historicity, systemic coherence, consensus, and value (418-9). Van
Leeuwen identifies four aspects which can be involved in creating or evaluating
authenticity: genuine provenance or authorship, faithfulness of representation,
authorization by some external authority, and the expression of a true
sentiment or style (392-93). He stresses the social construction of authenticity
as well as the role it plays in the reproduction of normative values and
hierarchies. In this view, authenticity is an evaluation of the validity of an
object or the actions of an agent, and is therefore tied to the cultural, social, and
historical forces which enforce certain judgements as valid over others.
Mapes identifies five rhetorical strategies (historicity, simplicity, pioneer spirit,
lowbrow appreciation, and locality/sustainability) used to evoke authenticity in
food discourse in the New York Times. Her analysis focuses on the concept
of ‘elite authenticity’ and the ways in which the rhetorical strategies employed
by authors simultaneously normalize the privilege of the upper-class while
disavowing elitism and romanticizing the food and practices of the lower-class.
Thus, she argues that authenticity is a crucial way in which social distinction
is produced and made attractive in media discourse (283). Building on Mapes,
Skibinsky has found that Asian restaurants in the U.S. carefully mediate
authenticity to produce an indistinct ‘Asian’ identity which is simultaneously
exotic but non-threatening to appeal to the white, middle-class consumer.

2 Compare Lacoste et al., which takes a sociolinguistic approach, with Lehman et al. and Newman and Smith from management and

organizational studies.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

The work of Jurafsky et al. (“Linguistic Markers”) and Freedman and Jurafsky
likewise focuses on authenticity as a driver of distinction between social classes.
They argue that restaurants and advertisers cater to clientele of different
socioeconomic status by emphasizing different aspects of authenticity with
which their target customer can identify, and that these linguistic decisions,
which highlight different markers of distinction, are domain and context
dependent. Jurafsky et al. groups authenticity in restaurant menus into two
primary metaphors: naturalness and tradition. Words referencing naturalness
and the source or type of ingredients (natural, heirloom, local) were used by
more expensive restaurants, whereas mentions of tradition and historicity (old
fashioned, mother, home style) correlated with lower priced restaurants
(Freedman and Jurafsky 51–52).
However, authenticity is not just something projected by restaurants and
perceived by consumers. Karrebæk and Maegaard engage in a detailed study
of the construction of authenticity in a single Danish fine-dining restaurant.
Their article shows how intricately authenticity is discursively achieved in
different frames and semantic dimensions by using a variety of multimodal
resources and emphasizes the active role consumers play in co-constructing
and determining the authenticity of their own experience. Also focusing on
consumers, Vásquez and Chik observed how lay reviewers judged the
authenticity of restaurants as part of building their ‘culinary capital’ in order
to assert their expertise and belonging to a gastronomical social elite, i.e. to the
ranks of connoisseurs. This was accomplished by the use of discursive resources
such as referencing first-hand knowledge gained through travel and indicating
a personal or heritage connection to the cuisine, especially in reviews of ‘ethnic
cuisine’ (242).
For lay reviewers, discussing authenticity is an important resource in identity
construction, and reviewers actively seek and co-construct authentic
experiences. As Coupland notes, “Authentic things […] are authenticating for
people who recognize their authenticity, as well as in themselves being socially
authenticated.” (419). By eating at authentic restaurants and telling others
about it, reviewers increase their own culinary and cultural capital,
distinguishing themselves from other consumers who are not ‘in the know’
and marking themselves as having authentic taste, in all senses of the word.
However, even if a reviewer deems the restaurant to be inauthentic, making
such an evaluation involves claiming the knowledge and authority needed to
make an evaluation of authenticity in the first place, thereby preserving the
reviewer’s positive self-presentation and cultural capital.

The Quantification of Authenticity
The motivation of management studies to quantify consumer perceptions of
authenticity reflected in textual data has largely been to understand its effect
on value judgments and consumer satisfaction. The model adopted for the
quantitative analysis in this article divides authenticity into four subtypes: type,

Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

moral, idiosyncratic, and craft authenticity. Type authenticity relates to fidelity
to genre or archetype, whereas moral authenticity describes an evaluation of
the sincerity of the views and choices expressed by individuals or organizations.
Closely related to type authenticity, craft authenticity is tied to the skill and
quality of production, while idiosyncratic authenticity concerns the perceived
uniqueness and quirkiness of an organization or product, tying it to moral
authenticity (O’Connor et al. 3–4).3
Both Kovács et al. and O’Connor et al. adopt a lexicon-based approach similar
to sentiment analysis. Kovács et al. found that reviews with higher authenticity
scores correlated to a higher star rating, and that consumers were willing to pay
higher prices for products or experiences they considered more authentic (12,
17). Further research found that each of the authenticity subtypes mentioned
above exerted a positive effect on the evaluation of restaurants measured by
star rating and willingness to pay, but to a different degree. This more nuanced
approach aimed to account for the ways in which evaluating authenticity
involves multiple and overlapping context dependent meanings, as discussed in
the previous section (O’Connor et al. 9–11).
The clarity provided by the framework of Newman and Smith is beneficial
for any attempt to approach authenticity from a quantitative or ‘big-data’
perspective. In their typology of authenticity judgements they emphasize that
the criteria against which authenticity is judged (external or internal) as well
as the type of referent being evaluated (agent or object) shape the way
authenticity is evaluated. In their model it is the interaction between these two
dimensions which gives rise to different types of authenticity (614).
This insight allows us to make informed predictions regarding the types of
authenticity evaluations likely to be made in the data here. For instance, fivestar reviews have been found to focus most explicitly on the food, whereas onestar reviews tend to be narratives focusing on the actions of people (Jurafsky
et al., “Narrative Framing”). Thus, evaluations of type and craft authenticity
might be most prevalent in consumer reviews of restaurants with higher
authenticity and sentiment scores, whereas references to moral and
idiosyncratic authenticity may be more present in reviews with low sentiment
and authenticity scores. As can be surmised from the discussion above, being or
acting authentic is generally considered a positive attribute, so we can predict
that authenticity in general will be correlated with an increase in positive
sentiment. However, the impact that the different types of authenticity
discussed above have on sentiment, as well as the way in which authenticity
is evaluated in context—what is evaluated and how this evaluation is
achieved—are still not fully understood.

3 Examples from the data used here include: Type: “This place is authentic real Hawaiian poke.” Moral: “Service was wonderful, extremely

friendly and genuine.” Craft: “My Hemingway was fantastic! thanks to their expert bartenders…” Idiosyncratic: “Unique blends of flavors - not
your typical south of the border fare.”

Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Thus far we have covered many different models of authenticity from different
disciplinary perspectives. I view authenticity as an attributional concept which
is the result of dynamic social processes, rather than an essential quality of an
object or agent. It is an important means of distinction between consumers and
classes, but because of its social contingency the meaning of and markers for
authenticity must be continually negotiated. Different ‘meanings’, ‘semantic
dimensions’ or ‘types’ of authenticity are relevant in different contexts, and
often multiple types of authenticity are relevant simultaneously. I hope that
by attempting to quantify aspects of authenticity we can gain a birds eye
perspective which is complementary to the diverse research which has come
before. In this paper, I will adopt the approach of O’Connor et al. for the
quantitative investigation of the relationship between sentiment and
authenticity because the scores they provide with their lexicon make it easier to
operationalize and the types of authenticity they identify are largely compatible
with the other models discussed above. This will allow us to answer RQ1. I
will then construct corpora based on authenticity scores which will allow us to
answer RQ2.

Data and Methods
The data set under analysis was provided free of charge for academic use by the
company Yelp, which offers a platform for users to share reviews of businesses
they have visited and to read the reviews of others, among other services. Using
R, from a total corpus of N= 6,685,900 reviews from 10 metropolitan areas,
I selected all English-language reviews of U.S. restaurants, leaving me with
n= 2,595,487 reviews.4 From these reviews I created three corpora. Corpus
1 was created from a sample of n= 500,000 random English-language U.S.
restaurant reviews for an initial investigation into the data. Filtering for reviews
containing at least one item from the O’Connor et al. authenticity lexica
resulted in n= 283,549 reviews for the analysis. Corpus 2 was used for the
main quantitative analysis and consists of all English-language U.S. restaurant
reviews from the original Yelp dataset with 5 or more instances of words from
the authenticity lexica. This data selection process left me with n= 71,269
reviews, or 2.75% of the total number of English-language U.S. restaurant
reviews. While this removed a considerable number of the reviews, the amount
of data points collected per review provided an ideal data set for investigation.
The aim here was to improve accuracy of the automatically generated
authenticity score. To aid in a closer look at the realization of authenticity
evaluations in the corpus, I constructed Corpus 3 from a sample of n= 70,887
reviews from Corpus 1. Reviews with an average authenticity score in the top
quartile were grouped into the high authenticity review (HAR) subcorpus and
reviews with scores in the bottom quartile into the low authenticity review

4 The data used for this analysis was obtained in 2019. The current version of the Yelp Dataset has been expanded, see www.yelp.com/dataset.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

(LAR) subcorpus. Corpus 3 contains roughly 11 million tokens, with the
HAR subcorpus containing 2.1 million tokens and the LAR subcorpus 3.4
million tokens.
The next task was to compute sentiment polarity score, authenticity type score,
and average authenticity scores for each review. Since the concept of
authenticity encompasses several different meanings, it is likely to be expressed
with a variety of different lexical items, not merely using the word authenticity
or authentic. For this reason, I adopted the full wordlist of 91 authenticity
terms from O’Connor et al., along with the system scoring each word on a scale
from 0-100 in terms of how much it expresses each one of the 4 authenticity
types identified in their paper: moral, type, craft, and idiosyncratic
authenticity. Items included high scoring terms such as skilled (type: 81, moral:
77, idio: 60, craft: 58) or pure as well as low scoring terms like false or bogus
(moral: 14, craft: 14, idio: 16 type: 19).5 In order to minimize collinearity
between the scales I developed another version (Appendix 1) which only
contains the words most strongly associated with each subtype. If words had
the same score in more than one scale, they were retained in all of the scales in
which the score was the same. If a single word scored both above 50 in one scale
but below 50 in another scale the word was retained in each scale.
Sentiment was analyzed at the review level using a lexicon-based approach.
Using the sentimentr package in R, I computed the sentiment of each review
with the included “Jockers-Rinker” lexicon modified to remove all terms which
also appeared in the authenticity lexicons (Rinker). The authenticity type
lexica were also loaded into sentimentr and used to compute an authenticity
score for each review reflecting the overall valence of the authenticity type
terms present in the review. An advantage of using sentimentr for computing
authenticity and sentiment scores is that it uses a rule-based approach to detect
negation, downgraders, upgraders, and other lexical items which can
contribute to or modify sentiment in the text. In addition, I approximated
a general authenticity score for each review by taking the average of the
authenticity subtype scores. To make the authenticity and sentiment scores
more comparable, I rescaled all scores between 1 and -1. Finally, I used linear
regressions to predict the relationship between authenticity score and
sentiment.
For the analysis of Corpus 3, I chose the quanteda package in R and Sketch
Engine (Benoit et al.; Kilgarriff et al.). Sketch Engine was used as it provides a
way to explore the data with a user-friendly graphical interface. This allowed
me to quickly follow several lines of investigation as my familiarity with the
data grew. Quanteda on the other hand is highly customizable, and so was an
ideal environment for implementing the custom lexicons, calculating keyness

5 Detailed information is available in O’Connor et al. in Appendix S1, S2, and S3.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

statistics not available in Sketch Engine and preparing the data for linear
regressions. Keywords were computed with both the HAR and LAR
subcorpora serving as target and reference corpus in turn. Keyword analysis is
one of the central methods used in corpus driven research methodologies. It
is usually aimed at uncovering salient frequency differences of words between
the target corpus and a reference corpus which provides texts for comparison,
but it can be done with other metrics, such as dispersion (Brezina 79; Egbert
and Biber). This allows researchers to understand the ‘aboutness’ of a corpus
through the analysis of these lists ranked by statistical significance or effect
size to measure saliency (Baker 125). Following Gabrielatos, I used Difference
Coefficient to measure effect size and G2 to measure statistical significance
with a cutoff of 18.81 (Gabrielatos 225). After an initial analysis I introduced
a cutoff of n ≥ 5 for absolute frequency in the target corpus in order to
remove extremely infrequent keywords. Based on the literature review and
an examination of collocates and concordances, I then grouped the top 25
keywords according to semantic domain.

Results
The Link between Sentiment and Authenticity
Comparing authenticity scores with sentiment polarity scores provided the
opportunity to compare two lexicon-based text analysis techniques covering
differing but overlapping semantic domains. This is particularly useful to gain a
sense of how authenticity analysis, a relatively new technique, performs against
a more established metric. The results from Corpus 1 show that an increase
in authenticity score correlates with an increase in sentiment. Figures 1 and
2 show average authenticity score plotted against sentiment for two data
selection scenarios. Figure 1 shows all reviews from Corpus 1, indicating a
slight positive relationship between authenticity and sentiment while also
showing considerable variance in the data. This could have been due to a lack
of data points to accurately calculate the authenticity score per review since
authenticity is a narrower domain of evaluation than sentiment in general. To
see if this might be the case, the second model only used reviews with 5 or more
matches for words in the O’Connor et al. lexica. This considerably reduced
the variance in the authenticity scores, as visible in fig. 2, and the linear model
predicted a slightly larger positive effect of authenticity on sentiment and was
able to explain more of the variance in the data, as shown by the higher R2.
However, one downside of this approach is that the number of reviews was
reduced to n= 7,350. Since there is a notable bias towards positive language in
restaurant reviews this most clearly impacted the lower range of authenticity
and sentiment scores (Jurafsky et al., “Narrative Framing”). Because of this,
Corpus 2 included all reviews with 5 or more authenticity terms to add as many
data points as possible at the lower end of the authenticity and sentiment score
range, while maintaining the benefits of the frequency cutoff.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Figure 1. Average authenticity score compared to sentiment for all reviews in Corpus 1.

Figure 2. Average authenticity score compared to sentiment score for all reviews in Corpus 1 containing 5 or more
authenticity terms.

As can be seen from table 1 and fig. 3, this improved the model considerably.
Expanding the size of the data set allowed for a slightly larger R2, smaller
standard deviation, and showed stronger effect of authenticity on sentiment.
These results show that the average authenticity rating of a review increases as
the sentiment rating increases. This means that the more positive authenticity
words are present in a review, the more the writer of that review uses positive

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Figure 3. Average authenticity score compared to sentiment score for all reviews in Corpus 2.

Table 1. Results of the linear regression showing the predictive power of average authenticity score on sentiment score for
three different data selection scenarios.

language overall. This finding adds to the body of research which has found
numerous positive outcomes for organizations attached to an increased
perception of authenticity, such as O’Connor et al. and Lehman et al.
While the previous analysis was done with the original lexica from O’Connor
et al., the analysis of the individual subtypes was done with the modified lexica.
Looking at table 2, which shows the results of the linear model comparing the
four types of authenticity evaluations, a more complex picture emerges: craft
authenticity emerges as the strongest predictor of review sentiment, followed
by idiosyncratic authenticity. This suggests that both positive evaluations of
food and the quality of production, as well as the unique and inexplicable
appeal and identity of a restaurant play an important role in shaping reviewers’
evaluations of their dining experience. Type authenticity plays a smaller role
but still contributes positively to sentiment. These findings support the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Table 2. Predictive power of authenticity subtype on sentiment in Corpus 2.

assertion that reviewers seek to establish culinary capital in their texts by
highlighting aspects of restaurants which contribute to social
distinction—especially if reviewing a restaurant positively. While words
associated with type authenticity such as delicious or real are typically used
positively, affirming something as real caramel or real milk offers the reviewer
less of an opportunity to display their culinary knowledge and create
distinction than describing a dish as having creative spicing.
Contrary to the findings of O’Connor et al., which found that all subtypes
of authenticity contributed positively to star ratings, moral authenticity
contributed negatively to sentiment. One potential explanation for this slightly
negative effect is that the positive associations which survey respondents had
with words such as decent or pure when the scores were generated for the
authenticity lexica of O’Connor et al. are related to abstract or prototypical
meanings that are less readily transposed to the restaurant domain than those
of the other authenticity types. Specifically in relation to authenticity, whether
someone is evaluating an object or an agent has been found to shape the type
of evaluation made (Newman and Smith 614). For example, saying someone
is a decent person is a positive evaluation of authentic moral character, whereas
saying that the sandwich was decent is much less positive, and could be
understood as a neutral or even slightly negative evaluation of the taste or
quality of the food depending on the context.6 This is confirmed by a look in
Corpus 3 at collocates of decent (n = 6,927, FPM = 618.68), the most frequent
word from the moral authenticity lexicon.7 When sorting by LogDice, the
strongest left and right noun lemma collocates within a three-word window
include objects such as price (LogDice = 9.82), selection (LogDice = 9.53), and

6 See also Vásquez 34-5 for a discussion of lukewarm evaluations in consumer reviews.
7 FPM = frequency per million words

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

food (LogDice = 9.14), whereas references to agents who could be evaluated
on moral authenticity appear less often and collocate less strongly.8 The only
reference to an agent in the top 20 collocates was service (LogDice = 8.73).
In addition, positive scoring moral authenticity terms have a considerably
higher relative frequency in one-star reviews (FPM = 700.63) than five-star
reviews (FPM = 282.18) as well as in the LAR subcorpus (FPM = 992.54) than
in the HAR subcorpus (FPM = 321.3). The highest scoring moral authenticity
term, caring (FPM = 8.57), is indeed used to evaluate the moral authenticity of
agents in the reviews in Corpus 3, but appears infrequently compared to the
other terms.9 As noted above, since one star reviews are more likely to focus
on people and their actions rather than the food, it would follow that words
tied to moral authenticity, or rather a lack thereof, are more likely to appear
in these contexts (Jurafsky et al., “Narrative Framing”). Moreover, types of
negation which are not detectable by the current methodology, such as sarcasm
or other complex forms of negation, may lead to inaccurate results—a common
challenge in automated text analysis (Taboada 333). This is why tools from
corpus linguistics were used to gain a deeper understanding of authenticity
evaluations in context.

Corpus Analysis
Authentic cuisine and authentic fare: Evaluations with
‘authentic’
To better understand the way authenticity was topicalized and evaluated in
the data, and to better understand and assess the results of the quantitative
metrics adapted from O’Connor et al., a small-scale corpus driven investigation
was completed using Corpus 3 and the HAR and LAR subcorpora. This
was partially inspired by Vásquez, who found that top down, automated text
analysis techniques, such as the ones used in the previous section, can be
improved with a closer qualitative corpus driven analysis (30).
To begin, a “word sketch” of authentic in Sketch Engine was created for the
entire corpus to gain a better sense of how the most explicit reference to
authenticity was used in the data. Word Sketches are particularly useful for
this type of initial investigation because the data is classified into subcategories
such as “nouns modified by ‘authentic’” or “subjects of ‘be authentic’”.
Unsurprisingly perhaps, the most frequent noun modified by authentic and
the most common subject of be authentic was food. Other common subjects
of be authentic include place and taste. After food, the most frequent nouns
modified are restaurant, cuisine, dish, place, taco, pizza, flavor, experience and
taste. Even at this early stage in the analysis, the presence of words such as
cuisine and experience show the close relationship between authenticity and

8 For information on LogDice see Rychlý.
9 i.e. Michael the manager is helpful, caring and nice as well!

Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

distinction, and indicate that consumers who style themselves as food
connoisseurs expect to enjoy an ‘experience’ rather than just a meal (Mapes;
Karrebæk and Maegaard). Likewise, cuisine and other synonyms for food (fare,
cooking) which collocated strongly with authentic are distributed unevenly
based on the authenticity score of reviews. All synonyms except for fare
appeared more frequently in the HAR corpus than the LAR corpus. However
the most pronounced difference was between the Germanic origin fare and
the French cuisine in a manner echoing the register shift between French and
Germanic origin English words noted in Mapes (281). In the HAR corpus
the word cuisine (FPM = 25.9) appeared more than twice as frequently as fare
(FPM = 10.63), while in reviews with the lowest authenticity scores cuisine
(LAR FPM = 20.63) appeared less frequently than fare (LAR FPM = 22.51),
as well as less frequently overall.
By referring to food as fare, authors emphasize the typical but unremarkable
nature of the food served. This points to the difficulty in using type
authenticity as a means to build prestige—being typical, the restaurant is also
not unique.
Ex. 4 If you’re looking for the standard run-of-the-mill class fare,
stay away. In fact you’re better off going to pizza hut across the
street. If you want to push the edge of your comfort zone, you’ve
found the right spot. […] Go, have fun, take a risk! (HAR, 4 stars)
In ex. 4 the reviewer uses the typicality and simplicity associated with fare
to create a rhetorical contrast between what most people eat and the cuisine
they enjoyed, constructing a basis for distinction and building culinary capital.
They identify the restaurant they are reviewing as a place to “push the edge
of your comfort zone” with an atypical culinary experience, and not for the
culinary naive or faint of heart who might be used to less adventurous fare. This
illustrates how reviewers use subtle language shifts to draw boundaries between
experiences using type authenticity.

Taste and the Burden of Authenticity
Looking at adjectives used with authentic points us in a different direction. The
most frequent adjectives used in combination with authentic were Mexican,
Italian, Chinese, delicious, great, good, fresh, tasty, Thai and Korean, such as in
in ex. 5.
Ex. 5 Highly recommended to everyone who likes HK style
cooking and authentic Chinese cuisine.
In fact, many more mentions of ethnicity were included, and examining the
strongest 1R collocates authentic of showed that mentions of ethnicity made
up 19 of the top 25 strongest collocates when sorted by LogDice. Together
these data indicate that lay concepts of authenticity are closely intertwined
with ethnicity, and that these evaluations often concern type authenticity.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

When most explicitly evaluating authenticity, reviews are concerned with the
taste of the food as an authentic representation of ethnic cuisine. Newman and
Smith's model suggests that reviewers are assessing authenticity in this manner
according to an internal reference, in this case based on their own history of
dining experiences and evaluating the fit of the taste of the food to a specific
category.
Therefore, most of the food judged explicitly on authenticity is food which is
marked: perceived by the reviewer as being ethnic cuisine of some kind and
therefore subjected to an additional evaluation other than tasting just good or
bad. This is oriented to explicitly by reviewers who chain evaluations together
such as authentic and delicious or authentic and amazing in ex. 6 (already
included as Example 1 above):
Ex. 6 This is the best pho you will ever have. They are straight
from Vietnam, family owned, no msg, authentic and amazing.
Been to los [sic] Angeles, little Saigon in Westminster, and all
over California. This is by far the best. (5 stars)
In this excerpt, the reviewer gives us a list of attributes which contribute to
their evaluation of the restaurant as authentic. This encompasses the assumed
ethnicity and history of the people who own the restaurant (i.e. straight from
Vietnam, emphasizing a close connection to the country where the cuisine
originates), the type of business (family owned vs. chain) as well as their
cooking techniques (no MSG), therefore evaluating the restaurant in terms of
type, moral, and craft authenticity. In the eyes of the reviewer, these attributes
not only contribute to the Pho tasting amazing but also legitimize the taste
as authentic. While reviewers also occasionally evaluated American cuisine in
terms of authenticity, the only references found in the data from the United
States in connection with authenticity mentioned regional cuisines, which can
also be considered culturally marked (Chicago, BBQ, Southern).
Restaurants seen as producing “non-American” cuisine are therefore placed
under a burden of authenticity, where food must be perceived as authentic
while also being non-threatening and not too strange. If the reviewer in ex. 6
found out that the owners were not from Vietnam, or that it was a franchise,
they might also revise their opinion of the taste or be inclined to account for
their positive evaluation despite a potential lack of authenticity, as in ex. 7:
Ex. 7 OK, I don’t want to hear that PJ Cheung’s10 is not
authentic Chinese…..everybody knows that. The family enjoys
coming here. (LAR, 3 stars)

10 Names appearing in the data have been changed.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Here, the reviewer defends against imagined criticism for their positive
evaluation of the restaurant despite its inauthenticity. This insulates the
reviewer from criticism, since it is the family and not the reviewer that enjoys
the restaurant, while also marking family enjoyment as a more salient evaluative
criteria than authenticity, which would typically be the most salient evaluative
criteria for an ethnic restaurant.
If reviewers are not able to integrate the taste or experience into their
expectations, they may provide a justification for their negative review by
ascribing this mismatch to different cultural norms or standards between them
and the ethnic group represented, describing the food or restaurant as being
too authentic. This dynamic can be seen in one reviewer’s justification of their
dislike of an unfamiliar dish in ex. 8.
Ex. 8 croquetas - we weren’t sure what these were because there
wasn’t a description on the bar menu. Unfortunately, as soon as
I took a bite I spat it back out into my napkin. Maybe this was a
little too authentic for me. (2 Stars)
The reviewer in the above example was clearly somewhat self-deprecating when
declaring that the dish they spat out was “too authentic”—since they admit
unfamiliarity with the cuisine they are eating, they blame themselves for not
being able to adequately judge or appreciate the food. Nonetheless, describing
the food as too authentic emphasizes the mismatch between their expectations
and the unfamiliar food they received, which contributed to their negative
review. This also plays a role in ex. 9 below, which is an extract from a longer
review where the author describes seeing the chef re-serve food they rejected to
other customers.
Ex. 9 Since we were sitting on the line, we watched the server take
it back to the Chef Tournant and show him – he took the plate,
walked around to the wok side of the line - added what was left
on our plate (that we’d returned) and put it on another order. […]
Sadly as a result, this restaurant became a bit too authentic for my
repeat business…
While the conclusion may likewise be a bit tongue-in-cheek, the reviewer’s
focus on authenticity is telling. The association of an unhygienic practice with
‘authenticity’ in the context of a Chinese restaurant draws on a long history
of discourse in the United States which stigmatizes Asian cooking practices
in general and Chinese cuisine in particular as exotic, deviant and unclean
(Mosby 135). By referring to the restaurants as too authentic, both reviewers
are discursively constructing a boundary between themselves and the readers
of the review as part of the hegemonic culture on one side, and the culture
represented by the cuisine they are eating on the other. The examples above
illustrate the double-bind restaurants are placed in by the burden of
authenticity: ethnic restaurants which match consumers preconceptions of

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Table 3. Top 25 keywords when comparing HAR and LAR subcorpus from Corpus 3, arranged by semantic domain and
by keyness according to difference coefficient. Words also appearing in the authenticity lexicons have been removed.

type authenticity are praised for it, but a negative experience may just as well
be ascribed to (taste) preferences or cultural norms of the group represented
by the restaurant being reviewed. While infrequent in the data (n = 4), these
examples provide an interesting insight to the ways in which type authenticity
judgements interact with prior beliefs and prejudices. As Lehman et al. note,
“authenticity is a good thing—so long as the referent carries appeal” to the
consumer (22).

Keyword analysis: authenticity types and distinction
In the next phase of the analysis, I computed keyword lists for the HAR and
LAR subcorpora by comparing them to each other in turn. This was done
primarily to provide a more detailed understanding of the types of discourse
uncovered by high and low authenticity scores, and it acts as a check on the
quantitative methodology used above. For example, while type authenticity
came to the foreground in the previous discussion of the realization of
evaluations using authentic, craft and idiosyncratic authenticity showed more
of a positive effect on sentiment than type authenticity. By examining how
authenticity is evaluated in context in subcorpora made up of either very high
or very low authenticity scores, we will more effectively be able to answer RQ2.
Table 3 shows the results of the keyword analysis. Since words which are
included in the lexicon of O’Connor et al. are the basis of the authenticity
scores which were used to create the two subcorpora, I removed them from this
analysis and the next keyword was selected until 25 keywords per subcorpus
was reached. The full keyword rankings by difference coefficient including any
keywords from the authenticity lexica are in Appendix 2.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

There are a number of differences which emerge between the two keyword
lists in the analysis. Globally, there is a clear contrast in the emotional tenor
of the two lists. The keywords from HAR reviews are clearly more positive
overall. Words reviewers used as part of narratives illustrate this fundamental
difference, with words such as celebrated or complementary signaling more
positive experiences than denied or refund, as can be seen by comparing ex. 10
and 11.
Ex. 10 After my meal, I was brought some complementary and
homemade coconut-pineapple ice cream. F@*$ing delicious.
Thank you Chippy’s. I will be back. (HAR, 5 stars)
Ex. 11 I wasn’t looking for a refund or freebie, but he didn’t even
offer one, just denied all accountability… (LAR, 1 star)
The category of EVALUATIVE WORDS contains keywords which were used
in explicit evaluations, such as typical evaluative adjectives and adverbs, as well
as some more creative evaluative resources like 10/10 or a bust, as in It was
a bust of a dinner. Comparing the HAR and LAR keyword lists reveals an
absence of positively connoted evaluative words in the top keywords of the
LAR reviews. Words in this category could potentially be used to expand
the authenticity lexica, as they are often tied to one of the four authenticity
types. Evaluative words in the LAR corpus such as miserable and disrespectful,
as in ex. 12, evaluate the behavior of agents and describe a perceived lack of
authenticity in their actions, and are therefore a negative evaluation of moral
authenticity.
Ex. 12 The waiter, an older man perhaps in his 60s, was
downright miserable. He took our order and was reluctant to
offer any information about any of the choices. (LAR, 1 star)
In the HAR corpus, evaluative resources such as thoughtful, welcoming, and
hospitable indicate sincerity in the actions of employees, and therefore indicate
positive moral authenticity.
Ex. 13 Janine and her team more than exceeded our expectations!
The dishes she created were thoughtful, inspired and absolutely
delicious! (HAR, 5 stars)
Ex. 14 The service here is warm and welcoming (they are actually
Thai!). (HAR, 5 stars)
ex. 14 is particularly interesting because of the causal relationship the reviewer
draws between moral and type authenticity: the warm welcome is all the
warmer because the staff at the restaurant are actually Thai, and so much
like in ex. 6 the lamination of type and moral authenticity strengthens the
overall perception of authenticity by the reviewer. Craft authenticity was also
emphasized by items such as talented and beautifully, which collocated

Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

strongly with participle adjectives such as presented, decorated, plated, and
crafted. These lexical resources emphasize the skill tied to the preparation of
the food or the design of the restaurant. Finally, the use of inventive was tied
to evaluations of idiosyncratic authenticity and scrumptious primarily to type
authenticity.
One domain which was unique to low authenticity reviews in this analysis was
EMOTION WORDS. These three verbs are all colloquial ways of expressing
strong negative emotional reactions either to the behavior of others, to the
food, or to some other aspect of their experience. As already noted, this feature
of negative reviews was observed more generally by Jurafsky et al. from which
they concluded that “one–star reviews are narratives of negative emotion,
stories about something bad that happened involving what other people said
and did” (Jurafsky et al., “Narrative Framing”). Likewise, the emotion words
in the present data were tied to negative interpersonal experiences or where
reviewers felt the moral order or cultural norms had been breached, such as in
ex. 15.
Ex. 15 Can’t complain to anyone when your server is the owner
and on top of that she charged us for the “so called extras” boy
was I pissed. Told her we’ll never go back to this cheating place
again.
Even the verb grossed out, which on a surface level appears to directly reference
a strong negative gustatory reaction, was most often used as part of a narrative
where being grossed out was the reaction to or result of moral transgressions.
Ex. 16 After only a couple of bites I was grossed out by the whole
thing, I turned and gave it to my dog. Sub Factory was a total
waste of my money and time. Note: When you own a little
independant [sic] food chain, you are supposed to “kick butt”
and go the extra mile with your food, and your customers. I
wasn’t satisfied or impressed as a customer, I will NOT be back,
not even for free food, it’s that gross…
In Example 16, the initial target of the evaluation is the taste of the food,
but the reviewer quickly shifts to expressing moral outrage. In the aside, the
reviewer accuses the business owner of a lack of moral authenticity since the
actions of the business owner did not live up to the criteria by which the
reviewer evaluates independent local businesses: not only did the food not taste
good, but the reviewer felt there was no sincere effort in the production of the
food or customer service, since the businesses did not go “the extra mile”. This
demonstrates how taste can also become a moral matter for reviewers when
evaluations are negative.
Finally, the two domains FOOD: ETHNIC OR CACHÉ and FOOD:
PROVENANCE OR TYPE illustrate a clear overlap between previous
findings concerning authenticity and social distinction and those of O’Connor
Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

et al. For example, frosty in LAR reviews is used to describe the drinks or
glasses the drinks are served in and echoes the more explicit language found
in the menus of less expensive restaurants. Keywords in this category from the
HAR corpus on the other hand were associated with the provenance (pacific),
preparation (squeezed) or type (hangar, Ethiopian) of food. In addition,
specific dishes mentioned were mostly foreign or foreign sounding words, such
as agua (fresca), chilaquiles, carbonara, or broccolini. These findings closely
echo Jurafsky et al. who noted that the most expensive restaurants in their
data focused on natural authenticity and used more complex and sophisticated
language (Jurafsky et al., “Linguistic Markers”). This is also seen clearly in ex.
17, where there is considerable specificity in the description of the dish as well
as a focus on the skill involved in the preparation of the dish. Scallops are not
just cooked, but perfectly seared and silver dollar-sized, and they were not just
served with broccolini but nestled on a bed of broccolini.
Ex. 17 I ordered the scallops (on his recommendation) and they
were delicious. Silver dollar-sized, perfectly seared, nestled on a
bed of broccolini, sweet grape tomatoes, apricots, and capers.
Taken together, these findings show that reviewers who use more positive
authenticity words also emphasize aspects of their experience and types of
authenticity which have been linked to more expensive restaurants, thereby
drawing attention to their own culinary capital. This also suggests that craft
authenticity may have had the strongest effect on review sentiment because
it is the type of authenticity which provides the most effective means for
reenforcing class distinction.

Discussion and Conclusion
Overall, the results of the quantitative and qualitative analyses show that
authenticity has a net positive effect on sentiment. Reviewers who viewed their
overall experience as positive also tended to view the restaurant they visited, the
food they ate, or the experience they had as more authentic. While this finding
may seem trivial, it is not always treated by reviewers as a foregone conclusion,
as the presence of phrases such as authentic and awesome and ex. 7 illustrate.
This finding was strengthened by looking at moments where the burden of
authenticity comes to the foreground: restaurants which serve ‘ethnic’ cuisine
undergo additional scrutiny in terms of their authenticity, which is often
treated by reviewers as a separate evaluative category. While previous research
has investigated the relationship between authenticity, increased star ratings
and price, sentiment analysis is such a ubiquitous technique in computational
approaches to language data that it was instructive to compare the two
approaches and ask what authenticity adds to our understanding of evaluation
in restaurant reviews. From this quantitative comparison we see the small but
discernible positive effect that authenticity has on sentiment.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Different types of authenticity also showed different contributions to the
overall sentiment polarity. As expected, craft authenticity showed the strongest
impact on sentiment, while contrary to earlier findings, moral authenticity had
a small negative impact on sentiment. The potential reasons for this are varied,
and likely it is a combination of factors: both the fact that negative reviews are
more likely to discuss agents and issues of moral behavior, as well as the domain
specific meaning of some of words in the moral authenticity lexicon, such as
decent.
While it was expected that type and craft authenticity would have the largest
effect on sentiment and that reviews with higher authenticity and sentiment
scores would mostly contain evaluations of type and craft authenticity, this did
not prove to be the case. Instead, craft and idiosyncratic authenticity showed
the greatest effect on sentiment. This was also borne out by the corpus analysis,
which mostly found evaluative resources related to idiosyncratic, craft, and
moral authenticity in the subcorpus of reviews with high authenticity scores.
When viewed through a Bourdieuian lens however, we can see that type
authenticity provides a poor basis for distinction, as having professional staff
cooking with genuine ingredients would be assumed for any high-class
restaurant. Therefore, emphasizing craft and idiosyncratic authenticity
provides a stronger foundation for distinction, both for the restaurant and for
the reviewer to establish themselves as a knowing connoisseur. These findings
provide further evidence that the effort of restaurants to create value through
emphasizing certain types of authenticity according to their target customer
are picked up on and embraced by consumers as part of their own identity
construction.
The corpus analysis also provides insights which could be used to improve the
detection of both positive and negative authenticity evaluations. Regarding
moral authenticity, this might involve including words like welcoming,
thoughtful or miserable. These words were not likely to have been included by
the methodology used to generate the authenticity lexica because they are not
tied to any prototypical understanding of authenticity. However, their use in
context illustrates their connection with the concept of moral authenticity in
the restaurant domain. In addition to this, the corpus analysis revealed other
resources that may not have originally been considered in the construction
of the lexica but which, through the keyword analysis, nonetheless show a
relationship with one of the authenticity subtypes: multi-word phrases such
as go the extra mile, verbs like pissed or ticked off, and other resources like first
names were all components of positive or negative evaluations of authenticity.
Including some of the evaluative resources discussed in the previous sections
might improve the accuracy of the authenticity lexica, and with an expanded
corpus analysis it is possible that many more terms could be added. The
challenge in this case is to expand and improve the utility of such specialized
lexica to detect discourse about authenticity in all of its various meanings,
while avoiding introducing too much noise into the data or watering down
Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

the concept of authenticity so that it is no longer analytically useful. While the
bulk of this work remains for the future, I believe that by remaining close to the
data we can more fully understand how authenticity evaluations are realized
in situ and avoid too much reliance on dictionary definitions or preconceived
notions of authenticity, while maintaining its utility as an analytical construct.
Of course, this study has several limitations itself. For example, limiting the
statistical analysis to reviews with only 5 or more terms from the authenticity
lexica resulted in the loss of a considerable amount of data. However, this
was seen as a necessary trade off to ensure the quality of the data included in
the quantitative analysis. Moreover, I was not able to integrate the evaluative
resources discussed in the corpus analysis into the quantitative analysis to test
if their inclusion would improve the performance of the lexica, and so this
work will have to be undertaken at a later date. In addition, the dataset only
included reviews of businesses in the Unites States. It is likely however, that
different cultures and different languages view the concept of authenticity
differently, and so other frameworks will need to be developed to account
for this. Nevertheless, I hope that this study could shed some light on one
particular type of evaluation, that of authenticity in restaurant reviews, and
in doing so to provide further evidence for the deep and complex way in
which all evaluations are tied to the context and social order in which they are
produced.11
Dataverse repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/9JVSMI
Submitted: April 10, 2023 EDT, Accepted: May 28, 2024 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

11 I would like to thank Steve Duman, Daria Dayter, Miriam Locher, and an anonymous reviewer for their comments and suggestions on earlier

iterations of this project and article. Thank you to Thomas Messerli and the editors for their patience and guidance during the publication
process.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

works cited
Baker, Paul. Using Corpora in Discourse Analysis. Continuum, 2006, https://doi.org/10.5040/978135
0933996.
Benoit, Kenneth, et al. “Quanteda: An R Package for the Quantitative Analysis of Textual Data.”
Journal of Open Source Software, vol. 3, no. 30, Oct. 2018, pp. 774–78, https://doi.org/10.21105/jo
ss.00774.
Bourdieu, Pierre. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Harvard University Press,
1984.
Brezina, Vaclav. Statistics in Corpus Linguistics: A Practical Guide. Cambridge University Press, 2018,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316410899.
Coupland, Nikolas. “Sociolinguistic Authenticities.” Journal of Sociolinguistics, vol. 7, no. 3, Aug.
2003, pp. 417–31. Crossref, https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9481.00233.
Egbert, Jesse, and Doug Biber. “Incorporating Text Dispersion Into Keyword Analyses.” Corpora, vol.
14, no. 1, Apr. 2019, pp. 77–104, https://doi.org/10.3366/cor.2019.0162.
Freedman, Joshua, and Dan Jurafsky. “Authenticity in America: Class Distinctions in Potato Chip
Advertising.” Gastronomica, vol. 11, no. 4, 2011, pp. 46–54, https://doi.org/10.1525/gfc.2012.1
1.4.46.
Gabrielatos, Costas. “Keyness Analysis: Nature, Metrics and Techniques.” Corpus Approaches to
Discourse: A Critical Review, edited by Charlotte Taylor and Anna Marchi, Routledge, 2018, pp.
225–58, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315179346-11.
Jurafsky, Dan, et al. “Linguistic Markers of Status in Food Culture: Bourdieu’s Distinction in a Menu
Corpus.” Journal of Cultural Analytics, vol. 1, no. 1, Oct. 2016, pp. 1–24, https://doi.org/10.2214
8/16.007.
---. “Narrative Framing of Consumer Sentiment in Online Restaurant Reviews.” First Monday, vol.
19, no. 4, Mar. 2014, https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v19i4.4944.
Karrebæk, Martha Sif, and Marie Maegaard. “Pigs, Herring, and Bornholm on a Table.” Semiotic
Review, no. 5, 2017.
Kilgarriff, Adam, et al. “The Sketch Engine: Ten Years On.” Lexicography, vol. 1, no. 1, July 2014, pp.
7–36, https://doi.org/10.1007/s40607-014-0009-9.
Kovács, Balázs, et al. “Authenticity and Consumer Value Ratings: Empirical Tests From the
Restaurant Domain.” Organization Science, vol. 25, no. 2, Apr. 2014, pp. 458–78. Crossref, http
s://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2013.0843.
Lacoste, Véronique, et al. “Authenticity: A View From Inside and Outside Sociolinguistics.” Indexing
Authenticity, edited by Véronique Lacoste et al., de Gruyter, 2014, pp. 1–13, https://doi.org/10.151
5/9783110347012.1.
Lakoff, Robin Tolmach. “Identity à La Carte: You Are What You Eat.” Discourse and Identity, Studies
in Interactional Sociolinguistics, Cambridge University Press, 2006, pp. 142–65, https://doi.org/1
0.1017/cbo9780511584459.008.
Lehman, David W., et al. “Authenticity.” Academy of Management Annals, vol. 13, no. 1, Jan. 2019,
pp. 1–42. Crossref, https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2017.0047.
Mapes, Gwynne. “(De)Constructing Distinction: Class Inequality and Elite Authenticity in
Mediatized Food Discourse.” Journal of Sociolinguistics, vol. 22, no. 3, May 2018, pp. 265–87, http
s://doi.org/10.1111/josl.12285.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Mosby, Ian. “‘That Won-Ton Soup Headache’: The Chinese Restaurant Syndrome, MSG and the
Making of American Food, 1968-1980.” Social History of Medicine, vol. 22, no. 1, Oct. 2008, pp.
133–51, https://doi.org/10.1093/shm/hkn098.
Newman, George E., and Rosanna K. Smith. “Kinds of Authenticity.” Philosophy Compass, vol. 11,
no. 10, Oct. 2016, pp. 609–18, https://doi.org/10.1111/phc3.12343.
O’Connor, Kieran, et al. “Disambiguating Authenticity: Interpretations of Value and Appeal.” PLoS
One, vol. 12, no. 6, June 2017, p. e0179187, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179187.
Rinker, Tyler. R Package ‘Sentimentr.’ 2019.
Rychlý, Pavel. “A Lexicographer-Friendly Association Score.” Second Workshop on Recent Advances in
Slavonic Natural Language Processing, RASLAN 2008, edited by Petr Sojka and Aleš Horák, 2008.
Skibinsky, Mika. “Construction of ‘Asian’ Identity in Restaurant Menus: A Case Study.” Inquiries
Journal, vol. 12, no. 10, 2020.
Taboada, Maite. “Sentiment Analysis: An Overview From Linguistics.” Annual Review of Linguistics,
vol. 2, no. 1, Jan. 2016, pp. 325–47, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-linguistics-011415-040518.
Van Leeuwen, Theo. “What Is Authenticity?” Discourse Studies, vol. 3, no. 4, Nov. 2001, pp. 392–97,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461445601003004003.
Vásquez, Camilla. The Discourse of Online Consumer Reviews. Bloomsbury, 2014.
Vásquez, Camilla, and Alice Chik. “‘I Am Not a Foodie…’: Culinary Capital in Online Reviews of
Michelin Restaurants.” Food and Foodways, vol. 23, no. 4, Oct. 2015, pp. 231–50, https://doi.org/1
0.1080/07409710.2015.1102483.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Appendices

Appendix 1. Modified Authenticity Type Lexica from O’Connor et al.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

“Authentic and Amazing”: authenticity as an evaluative category in online consumer restaurant reviews

Appendix 2. Keywords from HAR and LAR subcorpora
Keywords from the authenticity lexica (in italics) were removed from the analysis.
DC = difference coefficient; FPM = frequency per million; Ref. = reference corpus

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

