Krasselt, Julia, and Philipp Dreesen. “Topic Models Indicate Textual Aboutness and
Pragmatics: Valuation Practices in Islamophobic Discourse.” Journal of Cultural
Analytics, vol. 7, no. 2, Mar. 2024, https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.92535.

ARTICLE

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation
practices in Islamophobic discourse
Julia Krasselt1, Philipp Dreesen1
1 ZHAW Zurich University of Applied Sciences

Keywords: topic modeling, German-language blogs, valuation practices, Islamophobic discourse
https://doi.org/10.22148/001c.92535

Journal of Cultural Analytics
Vol. 7, Issue 2, 2022

This study investigates the analysis of evaluative linguistic patterns within the
context of the German-language Islamophobic online blog PI-News. The corpus
consists of texts that refer to the Quran. The innovation of this research lies in
two primary dimensions: Firstly, it adopts John Dewey’s pragmatism to establish
an explicit valuation theory. Secondly, it extends the boundaries of topic
modeling in the digital humanities by integrating van Dijk’s differentiation
between aboutness and pragmatic macrostructures of texts. Notably, within these
pragmatic macrostructures, the study highlights the practice of quoting Quran
suras as a significant linguistic pattern. Together with the analysis of topic
distribution and topic pathways in texts, the paper illustrates how evaluative
practices reinforce the ideal of an Islam-free Europe.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we address the following research question: How can we identify
textual and discursive patterns of (e)valuation in a medium of political
discourse? We approach this question in a per se (e)valuative environment:
the Islamophobic online blog PI-News (Dreesen and Krasselt; Krasselt and
Dreesen). The German-language blog comprises statements with a strong
negative attitude against liberal norms, especially against a multi-ethnical
society and migrants. We assume that PI-News is a self-stabilizing discourse
order based on (e)valuative postings addressing a largely homogeneous
Islamophobic audience of readers and commentators. For the purpose of this
paper, we concentrate on texts mentioning the Quran, in order to work with
a thematically very focused corpus (assuming that (e)valuation always refers to
some kind of object).
To answer our research question, we used a data-driven approach to give
insights into textual evaluation practices within Islamophobic discourse. The
paper provides two new insights: First, this research is based on John Dewey’s
distinction of “valuation” and “evaluation” (Dewey, Theory of Valuation). We
show how an obviously negative attitude towards the subject matter of the
Quran is transformed into discursive structures of value judgments on a textual
level. Second, we show how to innovatively use topic modeling – a data-driven
linguistic approach – to identify evaluative practices in political discourse. We
use topic modeling in a twofold way, extending its application in the digital
humanities: Building on the distinction between aboutness and pragmatic
macrostructures introduced by (van Dijk, “Text and Context”), topics are
categorized with a specific view on linguistic practices, especially evaluation.

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Here, we focus on the evaluative practice of quoting. In addition, we explore
the combination and pathways of topics in order to highlight how the
evaluative practice of quoting unfolds in the course of texts. Finally, we discuss
how quoting can be understood as an element of evaluation.

2. Background
2.1. Valuation and evaluative practices
Linguistic research on evaluation needs a theory of valuation. This sounds like
a given, but it is not. Earlier linguistic research on evaluation refers to speech
acts and conversational maxims (Sager; Zillig). Today, linguistic approaches to
evaluation focus on practices and positioning in speech and text. A decidedly
linguistic discussion of valuation issues can be found, for example, in the metaexamination of language ideologies, the affective relation of stance taking, and
in the understanding of the linguistic market (Bourdieu 651–55; Kroskrity
497; Silverstein 223, 252–56; Woolard 740–41). The latter is an example of
the rare adaptation of a value theory to linguistic issues. These exceptions
include Keller and Alba—Juez and Thompson, who at least mention selected
metaethical positions. It is noticeable, however, that theoretical and empirical
studies of evaluative expressions and language action mostly lack a systematic
reference to existing evaluation theories from, e.g., philosophy, sociology, or
psychology (cf. e.g. Sandig; Linde; Baker et al.).
Since the 1980s, interest in the scientific study of evaluation and valuation
has increased. This is also related to the fact that the development of certain
valuation practices in Western societies has led to the emergence of
“Valorisierungsgesellschaften” (‘valuation societies’), which are now being
investigated (Reckwitz 14). Valuation studies and the “sociology of valuation
and evaluation” are not only concerned with economic analyses and their
criticism (Lamont; Doganova et al. 87–88); particularly striking are the
analyses of the cultural valuation of symbolic goods and social practices (e.g.,
art, sports, music) and of value regimes (Lamont 203). Lamont asks:
“What can be done to ensure that a larger proportion of the
members of our society can be defined as valuable? […]
Addressing these questions will help us understand the impact of
dominant definitions of worth and cultural citizenship, as well as
their implications for xenophobia, racism, solidarity toward the
poor, and attitudes toward welfare redistribution.” (202)
Valuing and devaluing creates and maintains social orders, which is why they
need to be examined in both local practices and macro-structures in order to
understand their forms, functions and effects.
The understanding of valuation in this paper differs from the aesthetic or
economic understandings of taste judgments, such as those found in linguistic
analyses of evaluative use of language. It is not about the use of language to
implement judgments of taste and similar practices, but about an instrumental
Journal of Cultural Analytics

2

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

understanding of verbalized practical judgments aimed at guiding actions and
problem solving. In this sense, Dewey argues for a pragmatic valuation theory.
In pragmatism, action as a practical orientation is generally given priority over
reflection, because human behavior is primarily shaped by issues of usability.
The focus of pragmatism is how we can carry out our everyday investigations
in a self-directed and productive way. Considered in this way, the reasons for
(e)valuative Islamophobic practices lie in problem solving, not in, for example,
ethical, aesthetic, or political speculative reflection.
This metaethical reflection of Dewey is based on his differentiation of
valuation as attitude and evaluation as judgement:
“Dewey’s term ‘valuation’ covers both valuing and evaluation.
Valuing, prizing, and esteeming denote ‘affective-motor
attitudes[,]’[,] with more emphasis on ‘motor’ than ‘affective’.
Valuing is a matter of loving or hating, liking or disliking
something, where these attitudes involve tendencies to act”.
(Anderson)
This means that one does not need to have an idea of what one (does not)
value(s) in order to value (e.g., food, city, religion), and that valuing can be
implemented through habits (e.g., buying a type of cheese) (cf. Anderson).
“Value, whether immediate or contributory, may be found
without judgement, without implying cognition. If immediate,
we prize, cherish, esteem, directly appreciate, etc., and these
words denote affectional or affecto-motor attitudes, not
intellectual ones. So we use objects as means, treat them as useful,
without judgement.” (Dewey, “The Logic of Judgments of
Practice” 4)
Dewey claims that we practically value without reflecting and judging, for
example, by finding objects useful or not (e.g., using an umbrella in the rain).1
In contrast, value judgments arise in contexts in which we ask ourselves
whether we should value something. In contrast to most philosophical
positions, value judgments are practical judgments for Dewey: The function of
a value judgment is to continue an action when the normal course of action
has been interrupted by a problematic situation (e.g., considering buying an
umbrella while standing in the rain). They are made by us to orient ourselves
in situations and contexts (Anderson). Value judgments are “about the value
of actions and objects as means—that is, their value in relation to their

1 The umbrella may be immediately valuable; it may have added benefits and unintended consequences, e.g., being perceived as a highly forward-

thinking person.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

3

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

consequences, or the consequences of valuing them in the situation at hand”
(Anderson). In addition, value judgments are tools for valuing whether and
how changes to the evaluation process and objects are needed.
According to Dewey, we can recognize evaluative processes with means and
ends in the use of propositions. This is useful for understanding Islamophobic
texts:
“When the contexts are taken into account, what emerges are
propositions assigning a relatively negative value to existing
conditions; a comparatively positive value to a prospective set of
conditions; and intermediate propositions (which may or may
not contain a valuation-expression) intended to evoke activities
that will bring about a transformation from one state of affairs
to another. There are thus involved (i) aversion to an existing
situation and attraction toward a prospective possible situation
and (ii) a specifiable and testable relation between the latter as an
end and certain activities as means for accomplishing it.” (Dewey,
Theory of Valuation 13, emphasis original)
Dewey’s pragmatism assumes that head, heart, and hand are integrated in
behavoir, “in which, to use more technical language, prizing and appraising
unite in direction of action.” (Dewey, Theory of Valuation 65). By
distinguishing between valuation and judgment, Dewey shows their mutual
reinforcement. Valuation is transformative, as he explains, e.g., in The Logic of
Judgments of Practice (4-9):
“appraisals affect our immediate valuings of things. […] Practical
reasoning does not merely generate new appraisals; it transforms
our prizings. This is the point of Dewey’s theory of criticism
and taste. Judgments of the merits of prizings feed back onto
our primitive prizings and transform them. They not only make
these prizings more articulate (a union of prizing and
appraising); in making us more vividly aware of the features of
the object that we prize, they alter the directions of our prizings”.
(Anderson)
The fact that the appraisals change as a result of the realization of devaluing
judgements shows the relevance of the debate on Islamophobic statements in
the public discourse. The statements as judgments indicate the deliberately
emphasized characteristics of the evaluated object, the Quran. This offers
insight into what the authors of the Islamophobic blog actually consider to be
the problem with Islam and the Quran. These two aspects, the transformation
and the named features, are discussed in this paper.
What is most convincing about Dewey’s pragmatism for dealing with
evaluative language use is, first, its focus on practical judgements that aim to
guide action and problem solving; second, its focus on the transformation
Journal of Cultural Analytics

4

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

between verbal estimation and evaluation in relation to a concrete object: the
Quran. Let us assume that in the Islamophobic worldview Islam represents
a central problem in the idealized community of, for example, an extremely
homogeneous, purely Christian or libertarian-authoritarian ‘problem-free’
world. We do not know the everyday situations of Islamophobic persons. We
do not know when and how Islam is habitually devalued in an Islamophobic
way or when this is disturbed, and value judgments become needed. What
we can look at, however, is how the Quran is evaluated in the Islamophobic
discourse order of the blog PI-News. The patterned and thus habitual writing
of text of this kind on the blog involves valuation as attitude and judgement
with considerations of consequences. How this can be captured linguistically is
presented below.

2.2. A text linguistic approach to topic modeling
How can linguistic practices of evaluation be operationalized from a corpus
linguistic perspective? In the context of this study, we were interested in a
corpus-driven, quantitative approach to evaluation. More specifically, we
operationalized evaluative practices on the textual level by means of word cooccurrence patterns. To that end, we approached the task by applying a
machine learning algorithm, namely topic modeling. Contrary to alternative
corpus linguistic methods (e.g., sentiment analysis and other lexicon-based
approaches), topic modeling has the advantage of working without pre-defined
hypotheses regarding the linguistic form of evaluative practices. Furthermore,
it is a “within-corpus” method, i.e., it does not require a reference corpus that
is used for comparison or as some sort of baseline (as would be the case with
keyword analysis). In order to use topic modeling for the identification of
evaluative practices, we refer to a text linguistic theory, allowing to explain the
output of the topic modeling algorithm by means of semantic and pragmatic
macrostructures.
In the literature on topic modeling, the definition of the term “topic” remains
vague and mostly alinguistic. E.g., Blei states that “[…] topic models resemble
[…] the thematic structure of the collection” (79) and that topics are “themes
that run through them [collections of documents, JK]” (77), without defining
what a thematic structure or a theme is. Blei and Lafferty refer to the topic
structure of a corpus as “the index of ideas” (71) that is present in the texts
of the corpus. From a purely algorithmic perspective, topics are probability
distributions over the vocabulary of a corpus: topics are lists of words which
have a high cooccurrence probability in documents. Thus, topics are calculated
on the linguistic surface and are based on the cooccurrence of words, which
is then used to “identify the aboutness of a corpus” (Murakami et al. 244).
Murakami et al. point out that topics vary in the degree to which this aboutness
is visible, which becomes evident when topics are annotated with a mnemonic
label during the research process. Topics containing many grammatical words
are harder to label than topics containing concrete nouns, which is very well
explainable since concrete nouns refer to objects. The following table
Journal of Cultural Analytics

5

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Table 1. Example for topics from the study corpus.[^2]
18

Kundgebung 'demonstration’, Bürger 'citizen’, Video 'video’, links ‘left’, Veranstaltung ‘event’, Uhr ‘clock’, Polizei ‘police’, Pegida,
Pax, Samstag ‘saturday’, BPE, Bürgerbewegung ‘citizen movement’, linke ‘leftist’, jung ‘young’, Rede ‘speech’, Foto ‘photo’,
Plakat ‘poster’, einig ‘united’/’some’, Islamisierung ‘islamization’, Widerstand ‘resistance’, Demonstration ‘demonstration’,
Stuttgart, Dresden, Ort ‘place’, Aktion ‘action’, Platz ‘place’, Gespräch ‘conversatzion’, Straße ‘street’, Teilnehmer ‘participant’,
drei ‘three’

24

Muslimen ‚muslims‘, heißen ‚called‘, Teil (‚part‘, gegenüber ‚compared to‘, erklären ‚to explain‘, Thema ‚topic‘, diese ‚these‘, einig
‚united’/’some’, Seite ‚side‘, gelten ‚to apply‘, jedoch ‚however‘, mögen ‚to like‘, warum ‚why‘, gar ‚even‘, natürlich ‚naturally‘,
sogar ‚even‘, darauf ‚on‘, etwa ‚about‘/‘e.g.‘, welche ‚which‘, verstehen ‚to understand‘, Beispiel ‘example’, Aussage ‚statement‘,
davon ‚thereof‘, wenig ‚little‘, dafür ‚therefore‘, ein ‚one‘/‘a‘, allerdings ‚however‘, religiös ‚religious‘, wichtig ‚important‘,
während ‚while‘

exemplifies this with two topics from the corpus used in this study. The
aboutness of topic 18 can be summarized straightforwardly with the label
islam critical movements. In contrast, the aboutness of topic 24 is considerably
harder to grasp from the top words. In the literature, topics like 24 are
sometimes referred to as boilerplate/noisy topics", i.e., topics with “no
substantive meaning” (Maier et al. 108; see also DiMaggio et al. 586).
In an everyday understanding, the term “topic” similarly refers to the
aboutness of a text. A topic can be understood as the answer to the question:
“What is this text about?” (van Dijk, “Text and Context” 131). The answer
to this question can take different forms, ranging from a single word to a
short phrase or multiple sentences (Stede 88). Thus, the answer to the question
would very likely contain words which are amongst the top words (see section
4.1) of a topic in a topic model. Similarly, competent speakers find it easy
to link a text to a discourse: “Our linguistic behavior shows that we can say
that a discourse, or part of it, was ‘about’ something. That is, we are able to
produce other discourses, or parts of discourses, expressing this ‘aboutness’,
e.g., in summaries, titles, conclusions or pronouncements in any form.” (van
Dijk, “Text and Context” 131).
Theoretically more well-founded considerations of the term topic, however,
can be found within text linguistic theory. According to Hellwig, the topic
of a text is to be considered as something new, the answer to a question:
“Ein Thema ist etwas Fragliches, zu dem in einem Text eine Lösung mitgeteilt
wird oder mitgeteilt werden soll. Jedes Thema kann in Form eines Fragesatzes
verbalisiert werden.”2 (3). Similarly, Lötscher considers the topic of a text as
a gap or something controversial. e.g., an event, person or proposition (99).
More recently, Adamzik proposes a typology of topics, referring to sentence
semantics and semantic roles (215). Common to all approaches is that a topic
is conceptualized as an abstraction or reduction of the content of a text.

2 English translation: “A topic is something questionable to which a solution is or should be provided in a text. Any topic can be verbalized in the

form of an interrogative sentence.”

Journal of Cultural Analytics

6

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

An approach how this abstraction can be worked out analytically can be found
in van Dijk (“Text and Context”). According to van Dijk, a topic of a text
(he uses the term “topic of discourse” and “topic of conversation”, van Dijk,
“Text and Context” 119) is derived in a process of abstraction a reader or
listener has to make during reading/listening. This process of abstraction can
be described in terms of semantic operations, by which the topic of a text
can be derived from its individual propositions by specific rules, e.g., deletion,
selection, generalization, and integration (van Dijk, “Text and Context” 143).
Understood in this way, a topic is the result of a hierarchical organization of
the propositions of a text. With focus on action and structure (see below),
individual propositions in a text build macrostructures, which in turn build
further macrostructures and so on, until the stage of the global macrostructure
of a text is reached.
We follow van Dijk’s theory of macrostructures and argue that topics (i.e., the
result of the topic modeling algorithm) are a corpus linguistic approach to this
theory. Topic modeling certainly is not suited as a cognitivist model, i.e., it tells
us nothing about the way a topic can be inferred from a text cognitively (e.g.,
by a set of rules applied by a reader/listener), but the theory of macrostructures
is nevertheless a suitable framework for enhancing the analytical power of
topic modeling. Topics can be understood as indices of macrostructures –
above the level of individual propositions but still below the level of the global
macrostructure of a text. Topic modeling follows the assumption that a text
always consists of multiple topics; for each text, the proportion of each topic
is calculated by the algorithm. We argue that the global macrostructure of a
text can be operationalized as the combination of topics. Pathways of topics
can give insights into macrorules, i.e., the way how two (or more) topics unfold
linearly in a text is informative about the way these macrostructures are
connected.
Furthermore, van Dijk distinguishes between macrostructures with a semantic
function and macrostructures with a pragmatic function. Semantic
macrostructures consist of propositions that transmit semantic information
and create reference to objects:
“We see that the notion of ABOUTNESS is not very precise, and,
at least for sentences, not always decidable. […] More in general,
aboutness should be established in (con-)textual terms, perhaps
in such a way that a discourse or a passage of the discourse is
about something if this ‘something’ is referred to by most phrases
with topic function. In this case, however, we no longer deal with
the topic of a sentence but with a TOPIC OF DISCOURSE”.
(van Dijk, “Text and Context” 119)
We prefer van Dijk’s term aboutness (see also “‘content’, ie a propositional base”
11) instead of semantic macrostructure. Pragmatic macrostructures, on the
other hand, refer to the communicative function of a text and determine the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

7

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

interpretation of utterances (70). Following Searle, pragmatic macrostructures
consist of (conventionalized) actions that may or may not succeed (van Dijk,
“Text and Context” 92).
We would like to emphasize that texts are complex and ambiguous, so we do
not try to map or capture textuality with digital tools alone nor a simplistic
concept of text. Our approach reflects the following aspects: First, digitality
reduces the complexity of communication (Nassehi). The use of machine
learning is not intended to have a mapping effect, but rather to extract a few
aspects from the mass of information that are considered relevant. Second,
what is convincing about the idea of macrostructures is the fuzzy concept of
aboutness:
“a story may be about Romeo, about Juliet, about both, about a
specific (forbidden or impossible) love or about certain political
structures in the middle ages. Often, however, the ‘aboutness’
pertains to a given individual object or person, if most properties
and relations are assigned to one permanent referent or to those
objects/persons introduced in relation to it.” (van Dijk, “Text
and Context” 119)
Therefore, it depends on the discourse or media in question what a text is
about (i.e., Islamophobic blog about Quran).
Third, the linguistic use of topic modeling allows to understand topics as
indicators of macrostructures, not topics as propositions or practices. Topics
must be interpreted in the context of the texts in which they appear. This is
why we distinguish between topics indicating aboutness (“aboutness topics”)
and topics indicating pragmatics (“pragmatic topics”).
Summarizing, we argue that these two types of macrostructures can also be
identified in topic models, i.e., that topics indicate semantic as well as
pragmatic characteristics of texts in a given corpus. Though van Dijk
introduces semantic and pragmatic macrostructures as a dichotomously
identifiable set of textual characteristics, we argue that in an empirical, data
driven approach such a clear-cut distinction is not appropriate. Instead, topics
incorporate both types of macrostructures, but to a varying degree. I.e., topics
can be arranged on a semantic-pragmatic-continuum. Whether a topic is
placed more towards the semantic or pragmatic end depends on the
characteristics of its top words (e.g., topics with a high proportion of concrete
nouns are more semantic than pragmatic), its unfolding in the text and, even
more important, on the epistemological perspective under which topics are
examined. In the study presented here, we analyze topics with a view on
evaluation (cf. “key discursive themes” in Islamophobic blogs, Ekman 1992).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

8

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

3. Data
The blog PI-News was founded in 2004 and is one of the best-known Germanlanguage websites in the field of right-wing populism and anti-Islamism
(Schiffer; Dreesen and Krasselt; Krasselt and Dreesen). In a broader sense,
Islamophobic attitudes can be characterized as “group-based enmity”, such
as homophobia, anti-Semitism, and racism (Heitmeyer et al.; for a detailed
discussion on Islamophobia in contexts of Western myths cf. Kumar 41–60).
PI-News has been monitored by the German Federal Office for the Protection
of the Constitution since April 2021.3
The website gained popularity in connection with the controversy over the
Muhammad cartoons in Jyllands-Posten in 2005. The blog received more
attention in 2015, when Germany took in Syrian refugees and the
Islamophobic movement Pegida (Patriotische Europäer gegen die Islamisierung
des Abendlandes, ‘Patriotic Europeans against the Islamization of the
Occident’) was organized. The ideological concept of assumed “Islamization”
is key to almost all Islamophobic European movements: The blog describes
itself as “Pro-American” and “Pro-Israeli” and advocates “Against the
Islamization of Europe and For Basic Law and Human Rights”.
The blog posts used in this study were collected in a web crawling procedure
in October 2021. The corpus covers a period of 15 years, with the earliest texts
published in 2006 and the latest texts published in October 2021. Only texts
in which word forms with the morpheme koran ‘quran’ occur (e.g., Koran
‘quran’, Koranschule ‘Koranic school’) were considered in the analysis (cf.
section 1). The corpus contains N = 4,840 texts (5 Mio. words).

4. Method
Topic Modeling is a collective term for a series of probabilistic machine
learning methods that identify patterns of word usage in large collections of
text (Blei 77). Originally developed in natural language processing, topic
modeling has become a method widely used in Digital Humanities, e.g., for
the analysis of literary genres (Schöch), themes and motifs in poetry
(Navarro—Colorado) and novels (Jockers and Mimno).
For the analysis of evaluative practices, we applied a three-step procedure. First,
we calculated an LDA topic model and categorized the resulting topics in
aboutness and pragmatic topics based on van Dijk’s theory of textual
macrostructures (cf. section 2). Secondly, we examined frequent combinations
of topics (with a focus on evaluation) to examine how aboutness and pragmatic

3 Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz, “Statement von BfV-Präsident Thomas Haldenwang zur Vorstellung des Verfassungsschutzberichts 2020”,

June 15, 2021, http://www.verfassungsschutz.de/DE/service/presse/presse_node.html; Dreesen and Krasselt, “Medienporträt: PI-News.de.”

Journal of Cultural Analytics

9

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

topics are intertwined. Thirdly, we analyzed the pathways of topics to see
how macrostructures typically emerge in texts. The subsequent steps will be
explained in more detail in the following subsections.

4.1. Step 1: Identification of Topics
In topic modeling, a topic is a probability distribution over the vocabulary
of a corpus (Blei and Lafferty 73). Topics are usually represented by those
twenty to thirty words that have the highest probability of occurrence in that
topic. Typically, these top words are used for describing, categorizing, and
interpreting the identified topics (cf. section 2.2., table 1). Crucially, topics are
directly linked to the documents in the corpus: each document is a mixture
of multiple topics and exhibits an individual proportion of each topic. E.g.,
we can filter the corpus for documents in which topic 1 is most strongly
represented. Each word (except stopwords, see below) in a document is
assigned to a topic.
For modeling the PI-News corpus, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) was used
(Blei and Lafferty). It is one of the most frequently applied topic modeling
algorithms. In LDA, the documents of the corpus are treated as the observed
variables which are used to infer the hidden topic structure that generated the
texts (Blei 79). It is an unsupervised machine learning method, i.e., no training
data is used to infer the topics. Instead, the inference of topics is performed
via Gibbs Sampling, which is a specific form of Markov chain Monte Carlo
(Steyvers and Griffiths), i.e., each word in each document is assigned to a topic
in an iterative process.
In LDA, several parameters have to be set by the researcher. This concerns
the number of topics, Dirichlet priors and the usage of a pre-defined stop
word list. For the analysis presented here, the number of topics was determined
qualitatively by evaluating multiple topic models with a varying number of
topics. Criteria for evaluation were semantic coherence of top words and topic
distinctiveness (Evans 2). The final model contains 30 topics. We further set an
asymmetrical concentration parameter alpha, which allows for highly frequent
words to end up in a small number of topics instead of being spread over
all topics (making them semantically less coherent) (Wallach et al. 6).
Additionally, a stop word list was compiled, containing words which occur in
more than 30% of the documents. We did not work with a pre-defined stop
word list, since such lists may contain words crucial for identifying pragmatic
macrostructures and practices of evaluation in particular (e.g., quotation
marks, modal particles, personal pronouns or numbers). Also, words occurring
in less than 10 documents were deleted in a preprocessing step, since hardly any
distributional information is available for these.
All topics were manually categorized into aboutness and pragmatic topics (cf.
section 2). For this purpose, ten documents in which a particular topic was
most strongly represented were examined qualitatively to see how the top
words of the topic are textually embedded. In an open coding procedure
Journal of Cultural Analytics

10

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Table 3. Mean topic proportion over 10 bins in texts (topic pathways).
bin

topic

mean topic proportion in bin

standard deviation

0

29

0.26

0.02

0

32

0.12

0.01

1

29

0.27

0.02

1

32

0.14

0.02

2

29

0.28

0.02

2

32

0.17

0.02

…

…

…

…

9

29

0.25

0.02

9

32

0.15

0.02

(Breuer), topics were grouped based on WH-questions (e.g., in relation to
events, institutions, places, objects, i.e., what, when and where) and with a view
on possible practices of evaluation.

4.2. Step 2 and 3: Topic combinations and pathways in texts
After obtaining a topic model and categorizing the topics for the PI-News
corpus, we identified the two most dominant topics for each document and
their pathways in the text of this documents. To analyze how individual topics
are used throughout the course of a text (topic pathways), the topic-wordassignment in each document was used. Each text was split in ten equally sized
bins. For each bin the mean proportion and standard deviation for the two
dominant topics in the text was calculated (cf. Table 3). Topic pathways are
visualized by simple line graphs (one line for each topic), where the course of a
text is represented by ten bins on the x-axis and mean topic proportion on the
y-axis.

5. Results
5.1. Topics (Step 1)
Topics were categorized based on the idea of macrostructures indicating
aboutness and pragmatics, introduced in section 2. Topics of the aboutness
type were further categorized according to their aboutness, i.e., thematically
similar topics were grouped under the same mnemonic label. The following
topic categories were identified in the coding process (a comprehensive list of
all topics is provided as supplementary material).

5.1.1. aboutness topics
Most of the topics (24 out of 30 Topics) were categorized as aboutness topics.
In these topics, mainly nouns, adjectives and verbs with a very specific meaning
represent the top 30 words. E.g., topic 11 contains the nouns Schule ‘school’,
Kind ‘child’, Schüler ‘pupil’, Lehrer ‘teacher’ and the adjectives muslimischen
‘muslim’, christlich ‘christian’, staatlich ‘state’. It was labeled with the
mnemonic label ‘alleged Islam culture and how it contradicts with western
culture’.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

11

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Table 4. Aboutness topics and mnemonic labels in the study corpus.
No.

Description of categories as aboutness

Topic No.

1

on the role of the Quran

8, 27

2

local and domestic issues (e.g., concerning the construction of mosques in German cities)

2,17

3

activities of Islam-critical movements in Germany (e.g., PEGIDA)

18, 20

4

media criticism (e.g., media presence of Islam representatives)

23

5

criticism of German politics and parties

4

6

violence and terror with alleged Islamic origin (e.g., criminal proceedings after domestic violence,
terrorist attacks)

10, 13, 19, 28

7

Islam in international contexts (e.g., deployment of the German Armed Forces in Afghanistan)

14, 29

8

alleged Islamic antisemitism (e.g., conflicts with the Hamas in Israel)

22

9

alleged Islam culture and how it contradicts with western culture (e.g., violence against woman,
Islamic religious education in schools)

1, 3, 5, 7, 11, 12,
21, 26, 30

The categorization of aboutness topics into coherent groups remains fuzzy to a
certain amount. E.g., topic 26 could also be categorized as “violence and terror
with alleged Islamic origin”, since texts with a high proportion of this topic are
on domestic violence. But since alleged domestic violence in Muslim families in
these texts is viewed from the perspective of western values, we have chosen the
category “alleged Islam culture and how it contradicts with western culture”.
Despite the limitation due to their fuzzy nature, these topics can be clearly
separated from the following pragmatic topics.

5.1.2. pragmatic topics
Six topics were categorized as pragmatic macrostructures. The top words of
these topics differ from the other topics, since they mostly have either a very
general meaning (e.g., heißen, Teil, gelten, verstehen), are grammatical words
(e.g., ein, welche, daß, dafür) or indicate the reproduction of direct quotations
(topic 9: euer, vers, sure, numbers). Most of these words occur with a high
token frequency which explains why they end up in the same topic(s). This is a
result of our decision to set an asymmetrical Dirichlet prior Θ, which allows for
individual topics to occur with a higher probability then other topics (Wallach
et al. 8). Indeed, three out of these four topics (6, 24 and 25) are the topics with
the highest overall probability (cf. Fig. 1). Nevertheless, these topics should
not be excluded from analysis since the usage of words with a rather general
meaning can reveal insights about characteristics of texts.
The qualitative examination of topics listed in Tab. 5 shows pragmatic
macrostructures that indicate a hermeneutic process (topic 6, 16, 24, 25). The
hermeneutic process is an essential part of value judgment in contrast to
valuing. The value judgment becomes conscious when someone asking
himself/herself whether something should be (de)valued in order to solve the
‘problem Quran’. This is what Dewey called the process of investigation, which
includes devaluing, ignoring, and emphasizing aspects (Dewey, Theory of
Valuation 50). Therefore, making sense through interpretation is at core an
evaluative practice that can be identified by evidence, arguments or simply
semantics on different linguistic levels. The present investigation is proceeded
Journal of Cultural Analytics

12

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Table 5. Pragmatic topics in the study corpus.
Topic
No.

Top words

Pragmatic
macrostructure

topic
6

stürzenberger, michael, ideologie ‘ideology’, klar ‘clear’, versuchen ‘to try’, völlig ‘totally’,
offensichtlich ‘obviously’, gewalt ‘violence’, friedlich ‘peaceful’, sowie ‘and’, moslemisch ‘muslim’,
wichtig ‘important’, vergangen ‘past’, daher ‘thus’, gefährlich ‘dangerous’, beispielsweise ‘for example’,
mein ‘my’, bezeichnen ‘to denote’, faktum ‘fact’, öffentlich ‘public’, gelten ‘to apply’, fordern ‘to
demand’, politiker ‘politician’, totalitär ‘totalitarian’, gefahr ‘danger’, thema ‘topic’, wegen ‘because’,
genau ‘exactly’, gegenüber ‘opposite’, problem ‘problem’

hermeneutic
process

Topic
9

allah, sure ‘sura’, vers ‘verse’, töten ‘to kill’, ungläubige ‘infidel’, allahs, ;, gott ‘god’, glauben ‘to belief’,
daß ‘that’, prophet ‘prophet’, gläubige ‘believers’, ungläubig ‘unbelieving’, diejenigen ‘those’, kämpfen
‘to fight’, jude ‘jew’, weg ‘path’, euer ‘your’, hand ‘hand’, krieg ‘war’, 4, wahr ‘true’, 5, wahrlich ‘truly’,
Frieden ‘peace’, glaube ‘faith’, 2, gesandten ‘envoys’, kampf ‘fight’, schlimm ‘bad’

quotation

topic
15

the, of, and, to, a, is, ;, for, i, you, allah, we, that, are, özil, not, ', be, with, this, one, it, who, ], have, on,
islamic, =, they, as

quotation

topic
16

mein ‘my’, du ‘you’, mögen ‘to like’, glauben ‘to belief’, leute ‘people’, denken ‘to think’, kind ‘chilc’, dein
‘your’, freund ‘friend’, herr ‘lord’, euer ‘your’, nie ‘never’, lesen ‘to read’, angst ‘fear’, haus ‘house’, jede
‘every’, verlassen ‘to leave’, fragen ‘to ask’, gehören ‘to belong’, erzählen ‘to tell’, wahrheit ‘truth’,
sicher ‘secure’, geld ‘money’, liegen ‘to lie’, davon ‘thereof’, bitten ‘to ask’, darauf ‘thereon’, lieben ‘to
love’, straße ‘street’, versuchen ‘to try’

hermeneutic
process

topic
24

Muslimen ‚muslims‘, heißen ‚called‘, Teil (‚part‘, gegenüber ‚compared to‘, erklären ‚to explain‘, Thema
‚topic‘, diese ‚these‘, einig ‚united’/’some’, Seite ‚side‘, gelten ‚to apply‘, jedoch ‚however‘, mögen ‚to like‘,
warum ‚why‘, gar ‚even‘, natürlich ‚naturally‘, sogar ‚even‘, darauf ‚on‘, etwa ‚about‘/‘e.g.‘, welche ‚which‘,
verstehen ‚to understand‘, Beispiel ‘example’, Aussage ‚statement‘, davon ‚thereof‘, wenig ‚little‘, dafür
‚therefore‘, ein ‚one‘/‘a‘, allerdings ‚however‘, religiös ‚religious‘, wichtig ‚important‘, während ‚while‘

hermeneutic
process

topic
25

natürlich ‘of course’, daß ‘that’, gar ‘even’, sogar ‘even’, warum ‘why’, einfach ‘simply’, eigentlich
‘actually’, gleich ‘similar’, dafür ‘for that’, wenig ‘little’, heißen ‘to be called’, vielleicht ‘maybe’, gerade
‘just’, klein ‘small’, wirklich ‘truly’, bekommen ‘to receive’, kennen ‘to know’, lieb ‘dear’, richtig ‘right’,
beispiel ‘example’, verstehen ‘to understand’, deutsche ‘german’, eben ‘just’, alt ‘old’, schön ‘nice’, nah
‘close’, brauchen ‘to need’, fast ‘almost’, bild ‘picture’, darüber ‘about’

hermeneutic
process

by the following: The topics consist of communication verbs (heißen ‘to
mean’, erklären ‘to explain’, fragen ‘to ask’, erzählen ‘to tell’, bezeichnen ‘to
name’, lesen ‘to read’), verbs used in the illocutionary speech act of assertives
(verstehen ‘to understand’, gelten ‘to apply’, kennen ‘to know’, glauben ‘to
belief’, versuchen ‘to try’) and the consideration using part-whole relations (teil
‘part’, gegenüber ‘opposite’, seite ‘side’, jedoch ‘however’, während ‘whereas’).
The hermeneutic process includes also semantic objects with and about which
interpretation takes place: Communication nouns (thema ‘topic’, aussage
‘statement’, beispiel ‘example’, bild ‘image’) and other nouns that refer to
different aspects (muslime ‘muslim’, deutsche ‘german’, politiker ‘politician’,
gewalt ‘violence’, gefahr ‘danger’, problem ‘problem’, kind ‘child’, Freund
‘friend’, angst ‘fear’, haus ‘house’, geld ‘money’, straße ‘street’). Typical for
the PI-News-Blog are truth-related nouns (ideologie ‘ideology’, faktum ‘fact’,
wahrheit ‘truth’) due to the self-understanding as a counter-medium against
the ‘suppressing system of lying press’ (Lügenpresse). The hermeneutic process
works by focusing on some aspects while not using others in the same way
for sense-making. This is supported by using words for reinforcement (einig
‘agreed’, natürlich ‘of course’, wirklich ‘really’, genau ‘exactly’, wichtig
‘important’, sogar ‘even’, richtig ‘right’, nie ‘never’, klar ‘clearly’, völlig ‘totally’,
totalitär ‘totalitarian’).

Journal of Cultural Analytics

13

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Figure 1. Frequency of topics in study corpus (number of texts where a specific topic is amongst the top 3 topics).

Topics 9 and 15 refer to a pragmatic macrostructure which is characterized
by the practice of quoting. More specifically, topic 9 is the result of extensive
quotation of Sura verses (top words are Sure ‘sura’, Vers ‘verse’, the pronouns
euer ‘yours’ and du ‘you’ refer to the addressing of potential readers, the
numbers 4, 5 and 2 represent specific suras/verses). Topic 15 is the result of
longer quotes given in English (e.g., a speech given by Barack Obama).
Quoting suras is a practice to present the subject matter to be evaluated, the
Quran, in a supposedly unbiased way. Reference to the source of the
quotations (www.islam.de, Central Council of Muslims in Germany) and the
proof of the—translated—original sentences lend meaning to the quotation
practice. Crucially, a certain image of the Quran is demonstrated – and a
certain image of Islam and the collective group of Muslims is directly derived
from it. For the Islamophobic writers of the blog, the Quran presented in this
way is part of the problematic situation in which the evaluation process takes
place. In the following section, the way Sura quotes are used in the blog posts
in general will be introduced in more detail.

5.2. Topic 9: Quoting of Suras
Example (1) shows how quotes of Suras are typically embedded within a text.
The two quoted Sura verses (2:191, 2:193) are referred to as “timelessly valid
orders” given to Muslims to use physical violence against non-Muslims. The
current violence exerted by members of the Islamic state is directly connected
to the Quran.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

14

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

(1) Diese Moslems im Islamischen Staat wiederholen exakt die grausamen
Taten ihres „Propheten" Mohammed. Es wird mit den seit 1400 Jahren
laufenden Massenmorden niemals aufhören, solange Mohammed als perfektes
Vorbild gilt und diese zeitlos gültigen Befehle im Koran stehen: 2:191 Und
tötet sie, wo immer ihr auf sie stoßt, und vertreibt sie, von wo sie euch
vertrieben haben; denn die Verführung zum Unglauben ist schlimmer als
Töten. 2:193 Und kämpft gegen sie, bis es keine Verfolgung mehr gibt und die
Religion allein Allahs ist. (PINES_55007)
"These Muslims in the Islamic State are exactly repeating the cruel
deeds of their ‘prophet’ Muhammad. It will never stop with the
mass murders that have been going on for 1400 years, as long as
Muhammad is seen as the perfect role model, and these timeless
commands are written in the Koran: 2:191 And kill them
wherever you come across them, and drive them out from wherever
they have driven you out; for seduction to unbelief is worse than
killing. 2:193 And fight against them until there is no more
persecution, and the religion is Allah’s alone." (translated with
DeepL, 2024/01/22)
The analysis of frequently occurring 3-grams in Sura quotes supports the
observation that PI-News most dominantly quotes Sura verses which refer to
physical violence. In total, the corpus contains 744 quotes of Sura verses.4 The
following patterns occur in these 3-grams (table 6, highlighted in gray): (1)
usage of verbs and nouns referring to physical violence (schlagt ‘beat’, getötet
‘killed’, gekreuzigt ‘crucified’, gemetzel ‘slaughter’), (2) usage of imperative
constructions with plural pronouns (schlagt ‘beat’, tötet ‘kill’, meidet ‘avoid’,
lauert ‘lurk’), (3) reference to non-Muslims through the noun Ungläubige
(‘disbelievers’).
The high frequency of individual 3-grams indicates that Sura verses are quoted
multiple times. Table 7 gives an overview over the ten most frequently quoted
Suras in the study corpus. The analysis shows that only a small number of
different Suras are quoted (the Quran in total contains 114 Suras), with sura 8
and 9 being the most often quoted ones (more than 100 quotations).
Table 8 gives more detail about the five most frequently quoted verses within
these suras alongside an example quotation from the corpus. Without
exception, all five verses shown in the table contain incitements to physical
violence. In the corpus, we find multiple variants of one and the same verse,
i.e., quotations are not identical in wording. For the majority of the quoted

4 We counted only those quotations which are surrounded by quotation marks. There are nevertheless cases where quotes are not marked in a

clearly identifiable way, i.e., they are inserted without any quotation marks and cannot be distinguished automatically from the rest of the text.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

15

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Table 6. Top 50 3grams in quotations of Sura verses (N = 9945 3grams in study corpus).
3gram

n

3gram

n

3gram

n

wo immer ihr

47

ist es der

22

nicht an allah

19

ihr sie findet

33

schlimmer als das

22

seinen gesandten mit

19

die ungläubig sind

32

bis ihr ein

21

tötet sie wo

19

immer ihr sie

30

ein gemetzel unter

21

und tötet sie

19

und schlagt sie

28

gemetzel unter ihnen

21

das vieh sind

18

werden oder daß

28

ihnen angerichtet habt

21

den jüngsten tag

18

für allahs sache

27

ihr ein gemetzel

21

der lohn derer

18

und seinen gesandten

27

sie getötet oder

21

die juden und

18

auf der erde

24

und lauert ihnen

21

ehebett und schlagt

18

in die Herzen

24

und wenn ihr

21

herunter mit dem

18

die ihr glaubt

23

unter ihnen angerichtet

21

herzen der ungläubigen

18

er ist es

23

die ungläubigen trefft

20

ihr die ungläubigen

18

getötet oder gekreuzigt

23

es der seinen

20

im ehebett und

18

allah und seinen

22

sie und lauert

20

meidet sie im

18

als das vieh

22

die herzen der

19

mit dem haupt

18

an allah und

22

gesandten mit der

19

religion der wahrheit

18

der seinen gesandten

22

hände und füße

19

Table 7. 10 most frequently quoted Suras in the study corpus.
Sura

number of quotations

Sura

number of quotations

Sura 8

117

Sura 3

52

Sura 9

101

Sura 47

40

Sura 2

84

Sura 48

29

Sura 5

73

Sura 33

24

Sura 4

71

Sura 98

14

suras, the source of the German translation is not given. In a small number of
cases, the website of the Central Council of Muslims in Germany is named as a
source.

5.3. Topic Pathways (Step 2)
We identified topic 9, quotations of Quran suras, as a topic with a specific
evaluative function. In step 2 of the analysis, we used the topic modeling
output to examine how sura quotations are combined with other topics to
elaborate further on this practice of evaluation. Topic 9 most frequently occurs
in combination with the topics listed in table 9 (n > 20 texts).
Overall, the practice of quoting Sura verses shows a preference for specific
thematic contexts. A striking pattern is that Sura quotations are used in the
context of violence and terror (topic 13, 19 and 28). Topic 26, which has
been categorized as “islam in western society and culture” is also closely related
to violence, namely domestic violence in Muslim families. Overall, this
complements the findings of the 3-gram analysis for all the documents
regarding the close relationship between the topic of violence and quoted suras
verses.
Journal of Cultural Analytics

16

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Table 8. Corpus examples for the five most frequently quoted Sura verses (translated with DeepL, 2024/01/22).
sura
+
verse

n

example quotes from PI-News

Sura
8,
Verse
55

29

„Wahrlich, schlimmer als das Vieh sind bei Allah jene, die ungläubig sind und nicht glauben werden“
(PINES_4508)
(“Truly, with Allah those who disbelieve and will not believe are worse than cattle”)

Sura
8,
Verse
39

25

„Kämpfet wider sie, bis kein Bürgerkrieg mehr ist, und bis alles an Allah glaubt!“ (PINES_38590)
(“Fight against them until there is no more civil war and until all believe in Allah!”)

Sura
47,
Verse
4

23

„Wenn ihr die Ungläubigen trefft, dann herunter mit dem Haupt, bis ihr ein Gemetzel unter ihnen angerichtet
habt; dann schnüret die Bande.“ (PINES_15786)
(“When you meet the unbelievers, then down with the head until you have made a slaughter among them; then
cut the gang.”)

Sura
9,
Verse
5

22

„Und wenn die heiligen Monate abgelaufen sind, dann tötet die Götzendiener, wo immer ihr sie findet, und
ergreift sie und belagert sie und lauert ihnen aus jedem Hinterhalt auf. Wenn sie aber bereuen und das Gebet
verrichten und die Zakah entrichten, dann gebt ihnen den Weg frei. Wahrlich Allah ist Allvergebend,
Barmherzig.“ (PINES_3963)
(“And when the sacred months are expired, then kill the idolaters wherever you find them, and seize them and
besiege them, and lie in wait for them from every ambush. But if they repent and establish prayer and pay the
zakah , then give them way. Verily, Allah is All Forgiving , Merciful.”)

Sura
4,
Verse
34

21

„Die Männer stehen den Frauen in Verantwortung vor, weil Allah die einen vor den anderen ausgezeichnet hat
und weil sie von ihrem Vermögen hingeben. Darum sind tugendhafte Frauen die Gehorsamen und diejenigen, die
(ihrer Gatten) Geheimnisse mit Allahs Hilfe wahren. Und jene, deren Widerspenstigkeit ihr befürchtet: ermahnt
sie, meidet sie im Ehebett und schlagt sie! Wenn sie euch dann gehorchen, so sucht gegen sie keine Ausrede.
Wahrlich, Allah ist Erhaben und Groß.“ (PINES_3437)
(“The men are responsible to the women because Allah has distinguished some of them from others and because
they spend their wealth. Therefore virtuous women are the obedient and those who keep (their husbands')
secrets with Allah's help. And those whose unruliness ye fear, admonish them, avoid them in the marriage bed,
and beat them. If then they obey you, seek no excuse against them. Verily, Allah is Exalted and Great.”)

Table 9. Topics that are most frequently combined with topic 9.
Topic

n
texts

macrostructure

1

Topic 24 (muslimen ‘muslim’, heißen ‘to
be called’, teil ‘part’)

223

pragmatic macrostructure (hermeneutic process)

2

Topic 6 (stürzenberger, michael, ideologie
‘ideology’)

88

pragmatic macrostructure (hermeneutic process)

3

Topic 8 (', gott ‘god’, prophet ‘prophet’)

70

aboutness macrostructure (on the role of the Quran)

4

Topic 25 (natürlich ‘of course’, daß ‘that’,
sogar ‘even’)

54

pragmatic macrostructure

5

Topic 19 (video ‘video’, terror ‘terror’,
staat ‘state’)

51

aboutness macrostructure
(violence and terror with alleged Islamic origin)

6

Topic 13 (töten ‘to kill’, afghanistan,
anschlag ‘attack’)

39

aboutness macrostructure (violence and terror with alleged
Islamic origin)

7

Topic 26 (kind ‘child’, mädchen ‘girl’,
familie ‘family’)

34

aboutness macrostructure (alleged Islam culture and how it
contradicts with western culture)

8

Topic 28 (polizei ‘police’, täter
‘perpetrator’, opfer ‘victim’)

25

aboutness macrostructure (violence and terror with alleged
Islamic origin)

Fig. 2 shows the pathway of topic 9 in texts with topic 19 (A), topic 13 (B),
topic 28 (C) and topic 26 (D). In each facet, the blue line represents topic 9
(Sura quotations), the red line one of the other four topics. The x-axis shows
the position in the text (10 bins in total), the y-axis shows the mean topic
proportion (MTP). All four facets show a striking similarity regarding the
distributional pattern of topic 9: at the beginning of the texts, the MTP is
Journal of Cultural Analytics

17

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Figure 2. Pathway of Topic 9 (blue line in each facet) in texts with topic 19 (A), topic 13 (B), topic 28 (C) and topic 26
(D), red line in each facet.

lowest, i.e., the first bin (= the first 10% of a text) is the one with the fewest
words belonging to topic 9. In the subsequent course of the text, the MTP for
topic 9 is increasing before finally decreasing again in the last bin. In contrast,
the respective other topic in focus is most dominant in the first bin (with an
exception for topic 26 on domestic violence, cf. facet D). Overall, the topic
pathways indicate that Sura quotations are not given immediately at the
beginning of a text, but later on, when the topic of violence and terror has
already been introduced.
The following corpus excerpt gives an example how topic pathways instantiate
in a specific text. It shows text PINES_42440 in which topic 9 (bold face) and
topic 19 (on violence and terror with alleged Islamic origin, underlined) are the
two most dominant topics:
Focus: Propaganda des Islamischen Staates mit Islam nicht vereinbar
Am Mittwoch veröffentlichte der FOCUS einen skandalös islamverharmlosenden Bericht über einen jungen
Moslem aus Hessen , der sich von Salafisten radikalisieren ließ und zum militärischen Einsatz in den Islamischen
Staat nach Syrien abrückte . Dieser Fundamental-Moslem „ Mehmet “ , so wie er genannt wird , sei nach seiner
Rückkehr nach Deutschland völlig resozialisiert , so dass von ihm keine Gefahr mehr ausgehe .
[...]
Hinter dem brutalen Alltag des Islamischen Staates steckt nun einmal der Koran mit seinen
unmissverständlichen Befehlen . Aber diesem „ Mehmet “ sei es dort zuviel mit der Gewalt und dem Töten
geworden . Es habe ihn geschockt , dass Verrätern die Köpfe abgehackt , auf die Brust gelegt und sie so auf einer
Trage durch das Lager gezogen wurden . Als ihn ein IS-Anhänger bittet , seinem Vater den Kopf abzuschneiden ,
da jener nicht fünfmal am Tag bete , sei „ Mehmet “ verschwunden . Er habe erkannt , dass er , von Salafisten
angestachelt , einer „ fremden Ideologie “ gefolgt sei . Im FOCUS ist zu lesen : Hier in Syrien , im Kriegsgebiet des
sogenannten Islamischen Staates ( IS ) , wo die Radikalen den Feind , der brutal geköpft werden muss , selbst in
der Familie suchen .
Nur noch die Ideologie zählt , nur noch das extremistische Gedankengut bleibt übrig in den Ausbildungslagern
der Terrormiliz . „ Fremde Ideologie “ , „ Radikale “ , „ extremistisches Gedankengut “ ? Ein Blick in den Koran
genügt , um die brutalen Handlungen der frommen Moslems vom IS aus islamischer Sicht vollauf zu bestätigen : „
Und wenn ihr die Ungläubigen trefft , dann herunter mit dem Haupt , bis ihr ein Gemetzel unter ihnen angerichtet

Journal of Cultural Analytics

18

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

habt .“ ( Sure 47 , Vers 4 ) Oder auch : „ Als Dein Herr den Engeln offenbarte : „ Ich bin mit euch , festigt drum die
Gläubigen . Wahrlich in die Herzen der Ungläubigen werfe ich Schrecken . So haut ein auf ihre Hälse und haut
ihnen jeden Finger ab . “ ( Sure 8 , Vers 12 )
[...]
Der ominöse Vers 32 aus Sure 5 wird von moslemischen Täuschern und hiesigen Islam-Kollaborateuren immer
falsch und unvollständig vorgebracht . Dieser Vers zeigt in seiner kompletten Länge , dass er keinesfalls ein
generelles Tötungsverbot darstellt und schon gar nicht an die Adresse von Moslems gerichtet ist : „ Deshalb
haben Wir den Kindern Israels verordnet , daß , wenn jemand einen Menschen tötet , ohne daß dieser einen
Mord begangen oder ohne daß er Unheil gestiftet hat , es so sein soll , als hätte er die ganze Menschheit getötet ;
und wenn jemand einem Menschen das Leben erhält , es so sein soll , als hätte er der ganzen Menschheit das
Leben erhalten . Und Unsere Gesandten kamen mit deutlichen Zeichen zu ihnen ; dennoch , selbst danach
begingen viele von ihnen Ausschreitungen im Land . “ Mohammed zitiert hier aus einer alten Anweisung an die
Juden , die aus dem Talmud stammt . Da er bekanntlich weder lesen noch schreiben konnte , wurde sie ihm
vorgelesen . Sie lautet dort im Original : „ Denn jeder , der eine Seele Israels tötet , der gelte nach der Schrift wie
einer , der eine ganze Welt getötet hat . Und jeder , der das Leben einer Seele Israels rettet , der gelte nach der
Schrift wie einer , der eine ganze Welt gerettet hat .
[…]
So sei man dort sehr „ offen “ für die Ausreise der IS-Kämpfer gewesen und die türkischen Grenzsoldaten hätten
nur zum Schein in die Luft geschossen . Die Rückkehr nach Deutschland würden die türkischen Behörden
erschweren , vermutlich , weil die Türkei nicht wolle , dass man über die Verstrickung ihres Landes erzähle und
dass der IS auf indirekte Art unterstützt worden sei , wie Thomas Mücke vermutet . Es gibt nur einen Islam , wie
es auch der türkische Präsident Erdogan bestätigt , und moslemische Sunniten halten in der Umma
länderübergreifend zusammen , wenn es gegen die „ Ungläubigen “ geht . Interessierte Leser können sich per
email an den FOCUS wenden : » redaktion@focus .de Bitte wie immer in höflichem Ton und faktenbezogen .
Focus: Islamic State propaganda incompatible with Islam
On Wednesday, FOCUS published a scandalously Islam-denigrating report about a young Muslim from Hesse
who was radicalized by Salafists and left for military service in the Islamic State in Syria. This fundamental Muslim
" Mehmet " , as he is called , was completely re-socialized after his return to Germany , so that he no longer posed
any danger .
[...]
Behind the brutal everyday life of the Islamic State is the Quran with its unmistakable commands . But for this
"Mehmet", the violence and the killing had become too much . He was shocked to see traitors having their heads
chopped off, placed on their chests and dragged through the camp on a stretcher . When an IS supporter asked
him to cut off his father's head because he wasn't praying five times a day, "Mehmet" left. He had realized that he
had followed a "foreign ideology", incited by Salafists. The FOCUS reports: Here in Syria , in the war zone of the
so-called Islamic State ( IS ) , where the radicals are looking for the enemy , who must be brutally beheaded , even
in the family .
Only the ideology counts , only the extremist ideas remain in the training camps of the terrorist militia . " Foreign
ideology " , " radicals " , " extremist ideas " ? A glance at the Quran is enough to fully confirm the brutal actions of
the pious Muslims of IS from an Islamic point of view: "And when you meet the unbelievers , then down with your
heads until you have caused a slaughter among them ." ( Sura 47 , verse 4 ) Or also : " When your Lord revealed to
the angels : " I am with you , strengthen therefore the believers . Verily I cast terror into the hearts of the
unbelievers . So strike their necks and cut off every finger. " ( Sura 8 , verse 12 )
[...]
The ominous verse 32 from Sura 5 is always presented incorrectly and incompletely by Muslim deceivers and
local Islam collaborators . This verse shows in its entire length that it is by no means a general prohibition of
killing and is certainly not addressed to Muslims : " Therefore We have decreed to the Children of Israel that if
anyone kills a man without his having committed murder or without his having done mischief, it shall be as if he
had killed all mankind ; and if anyone preserves the life of a man, it shall be as if he had preserved the life of all
mankind . And Our messengers came to them with clear signs; yet even after that many of them committed riots
in the land . " Muhammad quotes here from an old instruction to the Jews , which comes from the Talmud . As it is
known that he could neither read nor write , it was read to him . It reads there in the original : " For whoever kills a
soul of Israel shall be counted according to the Scripture as one who has killed a whole world . And whoever saves
the life of one soul of Israel is considered in Scripture as one who saved the whole world.
[...]
They had been very "open" to the IS fighters leaving the country and the Turkish border guards had only fired into
the air for show . The Turkish authorities made it difficult to return to Germany, presumably because Turkey did
not want people to talk about their country's involvement and that IS had been indirectly supported, as Thomas
Mücke suspects. There is only one Islam, as Turkish President Erdogan confirms, and Muslim Sunnis stick
together in the Umma across countries when it comes to fighting the " disbelievers " . Interested readers can
contact the FOCUS by email : " redaktion@focus .de Please, as always, be polite and factual .
(translated with DeepL, 2024/01/22)

Fig. 3 shows the pathway of topic 9 in texts with topic 8 (A), topic 6 (B), topic
24 (C) and topic 25 (D). In general, topic 9 shows the same pattern as in Fig.
2: its mean topic proportion is lowest at the beginning of a text, rises towards
the middle of the text and decreases at the end of a text. I.e., we observe a stable
pattern regarding the preferred position for Sura quotations in texts. Topics 8,
24 and 25 show a different behavior then the topics in Fig. 2: topic 8 on the
role of the Quran (Fig. 3, A) has a pathway parallel to topic 9 which can be
Journal of Cultural Analytics

19

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Figure 3. Pathway of Topic 9 (blue line in each facet) in texts with topic 8 (A), topic 6 (B), topic 24 (C) and topic 25 (D),
red line in each facet.

explained by their close relationship: both are closely connected to the Quran
and develop in sync. The curves for topic 24 (Fig. 3, C) and 25 (Fig. 3, D)
run relatively flat (i.e., without salient peaks) which is an additional argument
for their categorization as pragmatic topics. They refer to a specific form of
hermeneutics (cf. section 5.2.1) that runs throughout the text.

Discussion
In this paper, we have shown that topic modeling is a suitable tool for the
detection of macrostructures in texts. Through the decidedly linguistic
application of topic modeling, aboutness macrostructures and pragmatic
macrostructures can be distinguished quite clearly from each other. The
aboutness topics relate to the situation in Germany and the West (topic no.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 12, 17, 21, 26, 27, 30) and to (international) violence
and terror (10, 13, 14, 19, 22, 28, 29). However, there are also clearly selfreferential anti-Islamic (18, 20) or meta-discursive media-related topics (23).
The pragmatic macrostructure consists first of topics indicating a hermeneutic
process (6, 16, 24, 25). Hermeneutics, interpretation, “investigation of things”
is what Dewey calls inquiry, of which value judgments are a part (Dewey,
Theory of Valuation 50). The blog writers refer to the Quran and point out
through different aspects and contexts the Quran as a problem in a given
situation in Germany and Europe.
The second type of pragmatic macrostructure concerns the quotation topics
(9, 15). It has been shown that the quotation of suras (topic 9) can be
recognized as a distinctive topic. The quotations are used to specify the
‘problematic situation of Islam in Germany and Europe’ and therefore the
Journal of Cultural Analytics

20

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

reason for the value judgements. Following Clark and Gerrig, focussing on
specific aspects and illustrating them are the very function of quoting:
“Demonstrations and descriptions are fundamentally different methods of
communication. Demonstrations depict their referents—what is being
demonstrated—whereas descriptions do not.” (764) If we understand value
judgement as a process of investigation, the quotation can be seen not only as a
negative aspect of the quoted Quran as a whole: “What the speaker ultimately
calls attention to is not the displayed token itself in all its singularity but certain
properties of it, i.e. some type which it instantiates.” (Recanati 640). That is the
reason why the quoted Suras have in some cases the textual functions ‘opening’
und ‘closing’, shown by the combination of the quotation topic (9) and the
semantic topics (19, 13, 26, 28). Recanati explains:
“More often than not, the properties in question are
demonstrated because they are properties of something which
one attempts to depict through the demonstration. Let us call
that thing the ‘target’. […] The speaker therefore does three
things at the same time: he displays a token, demonstrates certain
properties of that token (a type), and thereby depicts the target.”
(Recanati 642 emphasis original)
The target could be ‘Islam as violence’, demonstrated by the Sura quotes in
the context of violence and terror (13, 19, 28, and also 26). This finding is also
supported by the analysis of 3-grams frequently occurring in Sura quotations.
Following Dewey, the target is one of the most important features of the prized
object ‘Quran’.
What is the status of value judgements on Quran in the Islamophobic PINEWS blog? The aboutness topics, the hermeneutic process, and the
quotations have the function of confirming what Dewey calls the ideal:
“The ideal is, in the first place, a method of insight into the
given or present situation; and primarily it is not something to
be attained. That is, it is not a goal in an external, fixed sense
which is there and which we simple recognize and aim for. But
it is rather a way of interpreting the given experience. […] You
cannot eliminate the fact that in the projection the ideal does
go beyond present experience. You cannot get the ideal out by a
merely mechanical study of existing conditions. But it must grow
out of negative elements in the existing situation taken in relation
to the positive elements.” (Dewey, Lectures on Ethics, 1900 - 1901
60)
We do not know the ideal of the Islamophobic writers in detail, although we
can think of it in broad outlines: ‘Germany and Europe are no places for Islam.’
The appraisal of an object is “an act that involves comparison” (Dewey, Theory
of Valuation 5). Islamophobic writers imagine a state in which the Quran plays

Journal of Cultural Analytics

21

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

no role. The depicted target, e.g., in quotation contradicts this ideal. What
we can now see, based on the topic modeling with regard to the selected Sura
quotations, is how a verification of the ideal is made: With the help of the (for
the most part unspoken) ideal in the texts, the writers embedded quotations
in aboutness macrostructures with violence topics to show negative effects of
Islam. In this respect, the ideal is a method to find and demonstrate negative
evidence of the Islam underlying the situation under investigation. Finally, the
textual macrostructures transform the Islamophobic evaluation judgement of
the Quran into a primitive negative prizing, called hate, again.
What is dangerous about this is that it is almost impossible to distinguish
between means and ends in the valuation process: The also often unspoken
means form the content of the concrete end, not some abstract norm or ideal
(Dewey, Theory of Valuation 48). Moreover, ends become means for further
ends (Dewey, Theory of Valuation 50). This raises the question of whether
devaluating Islam and Quran is an end in itself, or a mean to achieve another
end. This also concerns the legal issue how an end is to be achieved (Dreesen
and Krasselt). With the costs of achieving the end, the assessment of the value
of the end comes into focus: “Practical judgment is creative: it institutes new
ends-in-view.” (Anderson).
Dataverse repository: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/FRYPSL
Submitted: May 15, 2023 EDT, Accepted: June 15, 2023 EDT

This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (CCBY-4.0). View this license’s legal deed at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0 and legal code at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/legalcode for more information.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

22

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

works cited
Adamzik, Kirsten. Textlinguistik: Grundlagen, Kontroversen, Perspektiven. De Gruyter, 2016, http
s://doi.org/10.1515/9783110339352.
Alba-Juez, Laura, and Geoff Thompson. “The Many Faces and Phases of Evaluation.” Evaluation in
Context, edited by Geoff Thompson and Laura Alba-Juez, John Benjamins Publishing Company,
2014, pp. 3–23.
Anderson, Elizabeth. “Dewey's Moral Philosophy.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by
Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman, Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2023, http
s://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2023/entries/dewey-moral/.
Baker, Paul, et al. Discourse Analysis and Media Attitudes: The Representation of Islam in the British
Press. 1st ed., Cambridge University Press, 2013, https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511920103.
Blei, David M. “Probabilistic Topic Models.” Communications of the ACM, vol. 55, no. 4, Apr. 2012,
pp. 77–84, https://doi.org/10.1145/2133806.2133826.
Blei, David M., et al. “Latent Dirichlet Allocation.” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 3,
2003, pp. 993–1022.
Blei, David M., and John D. Lafferty. “Topic Models.” Text Mining: Classification, Clustering, and
Applications, edited by A N Srivastava and M Sahami, Taylor & Francis, 2009, pp. 71–93. Crossref,
https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420059458.
Bourdieu, Pierre. “The Economics of Linguistic Exchanges.” Social Science Information, vol. 16, no. 6,
Dec. 1977, pp. 645–68, https://doi.org/10.1177/053901847701600601.
Breuer, Franz. Reflexive Grounded Theory. VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, 2010, https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-531-92580-6.
Clark, Herbert H., and Richard J. Gerrig. “Quotations as Demonstrations.” Language, vol. 66, no. 4,
Dec. 1990, pp. 764–805, https://doi.org/10.2307/414729.
Dewey, John. Lectures on Ethics. 1900-1901. Edited by Donald F. Koch, SIU Press, 1991.
---. “The Logic of Judgments of Practice.” The Middle Works of John Dewey. 1899-1924. Essays and
Miscellany in the 1915 Period and German Philosophy and Politics and Schools of Tomorrow, edited
by Jo Ann Boydston, vol. 8, 1979, pp. 3–28.
---. Theory of Valuation. The University of Chicago Press, 1939.
DiMaggio, Paul, et al. “Exploiting Affinities between Topic Modeling and the Sociological Perspective
on Culture: Application to Newspaper Coverage of U.S. Government Arts Funding.” Poetics, vol.
41, no. 6, Dec. 2013, pp. 570–606, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2013.08.004.
Doganova, Liliana, et al. “Valuation Studies and the Critique of Valuation.” Valuation Studies, vol. 2,
no. 2, Dec. 2014, pp. 87–96, https://doi.org/10.3384/vs.2001-5992.142287.
Dreesen, Philipp, and Julia Krasselt. “Medienporträt: PI-NEWS.Net.” Jahrbuch Extremismus &
Demokratie (E & D), edited by Uwe Backes et al., Nomos, 2022, pp. 237–54, https://doi.org/10.57
71/9783748936930-237.
Ekman, Mattias. “Online Islamophobia and the Politics of Fear: Manufacturing the Green Scare.”
Ethnic and Racial Studies, vol. 38, no. 11, Sept. 2015, pp. 1986–2002, https://doi.org/10.1080/014
19870.2015.1021264.
Evans, Michael S. “A Computational Approach to Qualitative Analysis in Large Textual Datasets.”
PLoS ONE, edited by Daniele Fanelli, vol. 9, no. 2, Feb. 2014, p. e87908, https://doi.org/10.1371/j
ournal.pone.0087908.
Heitmeyer, Wilhelm, et al. Rechte Bedrohungsallianzen. Suhrkamp, 2020.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

23

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Hellwig, Peter. “TITULUS Oder ÜBER DEN ZUSAMMENHANG VON TITELN UND
TEXTEN. Titel Sind Ein Schlüssel Zur Textkonstitution.” Zfgl, vol. 12, no. 1, 1984, pp. 1–20, htt
ps://doi.org/10.1515/zfgl.1984.12.1.1.
Jockers, Matthew L., and David Mimno. “Significant Themes in 19th-Century Literature.” Poetics,
vol. 41, no. 6, Dec. 2013, pp. 750–69, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2013.08.005.
Keller, Rudi. “Bewerten.” Sprache Und Literatur (SuL), Secial Issue: Texte Bewerten, no. 102, Dec.
2008, pp. 2–15, https://doi.org/10.30965/25890859-039-02-90000001.
Krasselt, Julia, and Philipp Dreesen. “„[D]Er Koran Muss Wörtlich Genommen Werden (Sagt Der
Koran)“. Korpuslinguistische Befunde Zur Islamfeindlichkeit Im Korandiskurs Und Ethische
Überlegungen Zu Bedingungen von Streitkultur.” Streitkulturen. Medienethische Perspektiven Auf
Gesellschaftliche Diskurse, edited by Christian Gürtler et al., vol. 18, Nomos, 2022, pp. 95–112, http
s://doi.org/10.5771/9783748911098-95.
Kroskrity, Paul V. “Language Ideologies.” A Companion to Linguistic Anthropology, edited by
Alessandro Duranti, Blackwell, 2006, pp. 496–517, https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470996522.ch2
2.
Kumar, Deepa. Islamophobia and the Politics of Empire. Haymarket Books, 2012.
Lamont, Michèle. “Toward a Comparative Sociology of Valuation and Evaluation.” Annual Review of
Sociology, vol. 38, no. 1, Aug. 2012, pp. 201–21, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-070308-120
022.
Linde, Charlotte. “Evaluation as Linguistic Structure and Social Practice.” The Construction of
Professional Discourse, edited by Britt-Louise Gunnarsson et al., Longman, 1997, pp. 151–72.
Lötscher, Andreas. Text Und Thema: Studien Zur Thematischen Konstituenz von Texten. De Gruyter,
1987, https://doi.org/10.1515/9783111371665.
Maier, Daniel, et al. “Applying LDA Topic Modeling in Communication Research: Toward a Valid
and Reliable Methodology.” Communication Methods and Measures, vol. 12, no. 2–3, Apr. 2018,
pp. 93–118, https://doi.org/10.1080/19312458.2018.1430754.
Murakami, Akira, et al. “‘What Is This Corpus about?’: Using Topic Modelling to Explore a
Specialised Corpus.” Corpora, vol. 12, no. 2, Aug. 2017, pp. 243–77, https://doi.org/10.3366/cor.2
017.0118.
Nassehi, Armin. Muster: Theorie Der Digitalen Gesellschaft. C. H. Beck, 2019, https://doi.org/10.171
04/9783406740251.
Navarro-Colorado, Borja. “On Poetic Topic Modeling: Extracting Themes and Motifs From a Corpus
of Spanish Poetry.” Frontiers in Digital Humanities, vol. 5, June 2018, p. 15, https://doi.org/10.338
9/fdigh.2018.00015.
Recanati, François. “Open Quotation.” Mind, vol. 110, no. 439, 2001, pp. 637–87.
Reckwitz, Andreas. Die Gesellschaft der Singularitäten: zum Strukturwandel der Moderne.
Suhrkamp, 2021.
Sager, Sven Frederik. “SIND BEWERTUNGEN HANDLUNGEN?” Zfgl, vol. 10, no. 1, 1982, pp.
38–57, https://doi.org/10.1515/zfgl.1982.10.1.38.
Sandig, Barbara. “Bewertungstexte.” Übersetzung - Translation - Traduction: Neue Forschungsfragen in
Der Diskussion ; Festschrift Für Werner Koller, edited by Jörn Albrecht et al., Narr, 2004, pp.
185–201.
Schiffer, Sabine. “Grenzenloser Hass im Internet. Wie „islamkritische“ Aktivisten in Weblogs
argumentieren.” Islamfeindlichkeit: wenn die Grenzen der Kritik verschwimmen, edited by
Thorsten Gerald Schneiders, 2010, pp. 354–76, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-92385-7_23.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

24

Topic models indicate textual aboutness and pragmatics: Valuation practices in Islamophobic discourse

Schöch, Christof. “Topic Modeling Genre: An Exploration of French Classical and Enlightenment
Drama.” Digital Humanities Quarterly, vol. 11, no. 2, 2017, pp. 1–53.
Searle, John R. Speech Acts. An Essay in the Philosophy of Language. Cambridge University Press, 1969.
Silverstein, Michael. “Language and the Culture of Gender: At the Intersection of Structure, Usage,
and Ideology.” Semiotic Mediation, Elsevier, 1985, pp. 219–59, https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-1
2-491280-9.50016-9.
Stede, Manfred. Korpusgestützte Textanalyse: Grundzüge der Ebenen-Orientierten Textlinguistik. Narr,
2007.
Steyvers, Mark, and Tom Griffiths. “Probabilistic Topic Models.” Handbook of Latent Semantic
Analysis, edited by Thomas K. Landauer et al., Lawrence Erlbaum, 2006, pp. 427–48.
van Dijk, Teun A. “Text and Context.” Explorations in the Semantics and Pragmatics of Discourse,
Longman, 1977.
---. “Textwissenschaft.” Eine Interdisziplinäre Einführung., Niemeyer, 1980.
Wallach, Hanna M., et al. “Rethinking LDA: Why Priors Matter.” Advancesin Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 22, 2009, pp. 1973–81.
Woolard, Kathryn A. “Language Variation and Cultural Hegemony: Toward an Integration of
Sociolinguistic and Social Theory.” American Ethnologist, vol. 12, no. 4, Nov. 1985, pp. 738–48, htt
ps://doi.org/10.1525/ae.1985.12.4.02a00090.
Zillig, Werner. Bewerten: Sprechakttypen der bewertenden Rede. M. Niemeyer, 1982, https://doi.org/1
0.1515/9783111357157.

Journal of Cultural Analytics

25

